
                              BOHEMIAN (ČECH)
                               BIBLIOGRAPHY


                  *       *       *       *       *

                         _Edited by Thomas Čapek_


                                 BOHEMIA
                           under Hapsburg Misrule

              _A Study of the Ideals and Aspirations of the
                 Bohemian and Slovak Peoples as Related
                  to and Affected by the European War_

                         12mo, Cloth, net $1.00.

“The story is both argument and appeal. As argument, it reveals that
Bohemian character, citing the place of Bohemia in the art of citizenship,
in the power of self-control, in its national ideals, in its policies of
accommodation to the plans of neighboring states, in its contribution to
the world of creative arts, and in its personal views of national duty and
responsibility. As appeal it enumerates, point by point, the injustice of
many years of Hapsburg rule, and sets out in clear light the many reasons
why the Bohemians deserve freedom.”

                                                    --_Washington Star._

                  *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration:

                                  THE
                               historie
                                  of
                                BOHEMIA.

                            _THE FIRST PARTE._
                                describing
                          THE COVNTRYE SCITVATION,
                           climate, commodities,
                    _the name and nature of the people_
                        AND COMPENDIOVSLY CONTINVĪG
                _the Historie from the from the begining of_
                         the Nation to their first
                          Christian Prince about
                             _the yeare of_
                                Christ
                                  990

The History of Bohemia

Harleian MS., British Museum. The earliest story of the nation in English,
written by an unknown author, presumably in the first quarter of the
seventeenth century]




                            BOHEMIAN (ČECH)
                             BIBLIOGRAPHY

           _A finding list of writings in English relating to
                         Bohemia and the Čechs_


                                  BY
                             THOMAS ČAPEK
                                  AND
                        ANNA VOSTROVSKÝ ČAPEK


                             _ILLUSTRATED_


                             [Illustration]


                        New York        Chicago
                       Fleming H. Revell Company
                        London   and   Edinburgh


                          Copyright, 1918, by
                       FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY


                       New York: 158 Fifth Avenue
                       Chicago: 17 North Wabash Ave.
                       London: 21 Paternoster Square
                       Edinburgh: 75 Princes Street




                                CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                                           PAGE

      I. INTRODUCTORY                                                 11

     II. ART                                                          58

    III. BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                 64

     IV. BIOGRAPHY AND PORTRAITS                                      66

      V. BOHEMIAN GLASS                                               71

     VI. DICTIONARIES. GRAMMARS. INTERPRETERS                         72

    VII. DRAMA                                                        76

   VIII. FICTION                                                      78

     IX. FOLK AND FAIRY TALES. MYTHOLOGY. LEGENDS                     83

      X. GUIDES                                                       85

     XI. HISTORY                                                      87

    XII. JOHN HUS. JEROME OF PRAGUE. UNITED BRETHREN. MORAVIANS      108

   XIII. JOHN AMOS KOMENSKÝ                                          128

    XIV. LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE                                     140

     XV. MISCELLANY                                                  147

    XVI. MUSIC                                                       151

   XVII. PERIODICALS                                                 158

  XVIII. PLANS. MAPS. VIEWS. JOURNALS                                159

    XIX. POLITICS                                                    162

      X. PRAGUE                                                      176

    XXI. SOCIOLOGY AND ECONOMICS                                     179

   XXII. THE SOKOLS                                                  185

  XXIII. TRAVEL. DESCRIPTION. GEOGRAPHY                              187

   XXIV. BOHEMIA IN BRITISH STATE PAPERS AND MANUSCRIPTS             194




                            ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                                  FACING
                                                                    PAGE

  The History of Bohemia in MS                                   _Title_

  Anne of Bohemia                                                     20

  John Hus                                                            30

  Protest against the burning of John Hus                             40

  The Kralice Bible                                                   50

  News from Bohemia                                                   60

  Why the Bohemian Estates rejected Ferdinand                         70

  Why Frederick accepted the Bohemian Crown                           80

  Elizabeth Stuart, Queen of Bohemia                                  90

  Unjust Mandates against the Bohemians                              100

  John Amos Komenský (Comenius)                                      110

  Komenský’s first work translated into English                      120

  Komenský’s History of Bohemian Persecution                         130

  Augustine Herrman’s Map                                            140

  Wenceslaus Hollar                                                  150

  Wenceslaus Hollar’s Memorial Tablet                                160

  Sir John Bowring’s Bohemian Anthology                              170

  Bedřich Smetana                                                    180

  Antonín Dvořák                                                     190

  Count Francis Lützow                                               200

  Thomas G. Masaryk                                                  210

  The Bohemian Voice                                                 220

  The Bohemian Review                                                230




NOTE ON BOHEMIAN PRONUNCIATION


A noted authority has said that “no other modern language can translate
the ancient classics so readily, and yet so completely and forcibly as the
Bohemian.”

The Bohemian is the most developed of the Slavic tongues. Consistently a
phonetic tongue, it is pronounced as it is written.

The vowels are pronounced as in Italian.

Invariably the accent falls on the first syllable, irrespective of the
length of the word.

Before Hus’s time Bohemian orthography resembled somewhat that of the
present day Polish. By introducing the diacritic mark, the reformer did
away with groups of consonants such as cs, cz.

The diacritic mark occurs on the following letters: á, é, č, ď, í, ň, ř,
š, ť, ú, ů, ý, ž. Ď and ó are used least of all. The mark tends alike to
soften and shade the sound of the letter.

  á is pronounced long as in darling.
  é as a in care.
  ě as ye in yellow.
  č as ch in cherry.
  í and ý as ee in tree.
  ň as ñ in cañon.
  ř is thought to be unpronounceable by a non-Bohemian.

The Germans taunt the Bohemians with the ř. The rsh in Pershing approaches
the sound though it does not quite express it.

  š as sh in shall.
  ú and ů long as in rule.
  ž as in j in the French word jour.
  ch as in the Scottish loch.




INTRODUCTORY


It sounds incredible, yet it is literally true, that every Slavic nation
was, before the war, and probably still is, better known to the English
speaking people than the Bohemians (Čechs). What is the reason? That the
Bohemians, who are the most literate of all the Slavs, have remained
undiscovered may be attributed to three main causes: They are not a free
nation. They are a landlocked nation. They are rated a small nation.

The opportunities which a seacoast offers to a people, to mention the
Dutch, Irish, Belgians, Norwegians, Swedes and Danes, all of whom are
numerically smaller than the Bohemian-Slovaks are inestimable. In the
forum of world’s commerce and politics, the sea is their powerful sponsor.
To a landlocked people this great boon is denied. Inland nations may reach
the outside world through an intermediary only, and if that intermediary
happens to be a powerful and ungenerous state, the policy of which is to
keep its little neighbor in the background, the consequences are obvious.

That there live in Central Europe Teutons and none others but Teutons was
being daily demonstrated to the Americans by a most convincing proof.
Almost every box of merchandise shipped here from that part of the world
bore the tell-tale mark “Made in Germany.” Rarely one saw at the terminals
goods labelled “Made in Austria,” and rarer still, “Made in Bohemia.” And
yet many an article of merchandise thus marked was really made in Bohemia,
for parts of Bohemia teem with all kinds of wonderful industries.

Because of centuries of political and economic subjection, the very
existence of the nation has been lost sight of by the Anglo-Saxons. In
the interval between the catastrophal defeat of the Bohemians in 1620 and
1848, the year of revolutionary changes, nothing has occurred in Bohemia
to attract the attention of the world to the Bohemian nation. The Seven
Years’ War, and later the Napoleonic Wars, were events that concerned not
Bohemia as an independent state, but the whole of the Hapsburg Empire. The
Russians acquired renown in the first quarter of the nineteenth century
by their defeat of Napoleon. Later, during the Crimean War, Russia again
came into prominence in the Anglo-American press. Kosciuszko and Pulaski
were names to be conjured with by the Polish immigrant. The uprisings
in 1830 and in 1863 made sufficiently known to the Americans the ideals
and the miseries of Poland. The Russo-Turkish War of 1877 and the Berlin
Congress following it made the English reader familiar with the geography
and political ambitions of the Balkan Slavs. The Serbs, the Bulgars,
the Montenegrines were successively introduced to the newspaper man
and through him to the public at large. Alone the Bohemians remained
undiscovered, unknown.

Before the war the average reader did not know where Bohemia was located
with respect to Austria-Hungary. That ethnically, there might be a
difference between a Čech, Hungarian and an Austrian he suspected, yet it
was not wholly clear to him wherein the dissimilarity lay. One could cite
countless instances of astonishing naiveté concerning the history of the
nations which inhabit central and southeastern Europe. Four years ago a
journalist and a writer who served on the western front in the capacity of
a war correspondent made the astounding discovery that “the ancient Czech
(Bohemian) language still continues to be spoken in Prague.” It would no
doubt amuse a Dutchman to read that “Dutch is still spoken in Amsterdam”;
yet transpose Dutch for Bohemian and Prague for Amsterdam and the analogy
is precise. When one remembers with what fine scorn an American looked
down upon that corner of Europe, which in his opinion exhibited altogether
too many superfluous boundary dots, one begins to realize what thankless,
almost futile task it was to talk to him of the trials, ambitions and
triumphs of the Bohemian O’Connells, Emmets, Shelleys, Macauleys and
Hallams. With the rest, the Bohemians had to pay the penalty of being
thought a small nation.

Again there are the Bohemians and bohemians and how to differentiate
between the two is still a puzzle to a considerable portion of the public.
Are all the Bohemians artists, who “secede from conventionality in life
and art”? That even cultured--let us not hope educated--Americans and
Englishmen entertain the weird notion that there exists some distant
relationship between Bohemians, bohemians and gypsies, is, alas, too
true. In the novel _Strathmore_, Louise de la Ramée (Ouida) for instance,
asserts quite seriously that gypsies in Bohemia have Slavonic features,
that their language is a dialect of the Bohemian and that the “lawless,
vagrant, savage race” is a Slavic tribe domiciled in Bohemia.

Not a few are misled by the term Czech, thinking it probably signifies
a people other than the Bohemians. A New York paper, in enumerating the
disaffected races of Austria-Hungary, named the Bohemians _and_ the
Czechs. This is precisely like saying Yankees _and_ Americans or Germans
_and_ Teutons, for, as informed readers are aware Bohemians and the Czechs
are one and the same.[1]

  [1] The race name of the Slavic inhabitants of Bohemia in the native
  language is _Čech_ (singular), _Čechové_ (plural). The country is called
  _Čechy_. _Čech_ is pronounced nearly like Chech (the last ch as in the
  Scottish loch). The use of the form Czech should be discouraged, inasmuch
  as it wholly fails to bring out the proper sound. The _Cambridge Modern
  History_, a distinguished work, adheres consistently to the spelling
  Č-e-c-h.

Of the continental nations, Germany excepted, the French were the first
to look inquiringly into the queer Austrian household. No doubt they
were led to study Slavic Austria largely because of their alliance with
Russia and because of their historical friendship for the Poles. Due to
the labor of three pioneers, Saint-René Taillandier (1817-1879), Louis
Leger (1843-) and Ernest Denis (1849-) _La Nation Tchèque_ is no longer
unknown in France. Other and younger Frenchmen,--to name one, André
Chéradame, the author of the widely quoted volume, _The Pangerman Plot
Unmasked_,--continue the apostolary work in France; but Taillandier, Leger
and Denis will always be honored as the pioneers of this propaganda. Of
the trio, Ernest Denis, Professor of the Sorbonne, stands closest to
the Bohemian heart. Denis’ monumental researches, _Huss et la Guerre
des Hussites_, _La Bohême depuis la Montagne Blanche_, and _Fin de
l’indépendance Bohême_, when published, may be said to have caused a
sensation. Unhampered by the censor, Denis was able to bring out facts
of Bohemia’s past which were a revelation to the Bohemians themselves.

The Anglo-Saxon who visited the Hapsburg dominions thirty or forty years
ago was yet unable to see anything but Teuton Austria; that is to say, he
looked at Bohemia and the other Austrian states wholly from the official
viewpoint of Vienna.

As a sample of the notions of Bohemia and the Čechs professed in America
and England a generation ago, suffice it to cite a passage or two from
Bayard Taylor’s _Views A-Foot_, or _Europe seen with Knapsack and Staff_:
“The very name of Bohemia is associated with wild and wonderful legends,
of the rude barbaric ages. The civilized race, the Saxon race, was left
behind; I saw around me the features and heard the language of one of
those rude Slavonian tribes whose original home was on the vast steppes
of Central Asia(!)” Again: “In passing the shrines by the wayside, the
poor degraded peasants always uncovered or crossed themselves, but it
appeared to be rather the effect of habit than any good impulse for the
Bohemians are noted all over Germany for their dishonesty....”

Taylor’s grossly distorted appraisal of Bohemia was not shared by Henry
Wadsworth Longfellow, as appears from the following lines by the famous
American poet:

   “Hold your tongues! both
    Swabian and Saxon,
    A bold Bohemian cries;
    If there’s a heaven upon this earth,
    In Bohemia it lies.”

Overnight the Great War has changed many a wrong notion. “Time changes
all, and by time is truth to victory guided; what in their errors the
years planned, in a day is o’erthrown,” prophetically sings John Kollár,
the great Slovak poet. Following the example of the French, several
English and American writers, Henry Wickham Steed, R. W. Seton-Watson and
Will S. Monroe among them, have in recent years paid visits to Bohemia,
and the result is both surprising and gratifying. It is certain that, once
aroused, Anglo-Saxon curiosity will not abate until it has learned all
about Bohemia, even though the knowledge obtained may disagree with the
Alice in Wonderland tales that have been related in Vienna to the old
time British and American travelers.

A new development in the study of Bohemia and her people by foreigners
may be said to date from the time the dual system of government was
introduced (1867). Until then the interest of scholars was confined wholly
to historic and sectarian questions; from that time on, political and
ethnological issues began to engage their serious attention.

The present bibliography lists, besides books and pamphlets, magazine
articles only; it does not pretend to register items appearing in the
weekly, much less in the daily press. To attempt the latter would be
beyond the scope and purpose of the catalogue. Exceptions to the rule have
been made in favor of articles bearing the signature of authors who are
known to be especially qualified to discuss the subjects selected by them.

Scarcely a book has been written on Austria or the Slavs which does not,
directly or indirectly, discuss Bohemia and the Čechs. The catalogue
cannot take cognizance of such publications, although, in this respect
also, the rule has been relaxed and books have been indexed, dealing
broadly with Austria and the Slavs. Colquhoun’s _The Whirlpool of Europe:
Austria-Hungary and the Hapsburgs_, Steed’s _The Hapsburg Monarchy_ and
Seton-Watson’s _German, Slav, and Magyar_ may be cited as typical examples
of these publications.

Quite correctly the spelling of proper names, though obsolescent, has
been left undisturbed. The Bohemians spell Hus, not Huss; Žižka, not
Zisca. Comenius is a Latinized form dating back to an age when it was the
custom to Latinize one’s surname; the real name is Komenský and Bohemian
history knows the educator by this name only.

The authors have availed themselves of the skilled services of Leonard
C. Wharton, who was asked to look into the rare Bohemica preserved in
the British Museum. Mr. Wharton performed this part of the work with
painstaking care.

Many of the seventeenth century items have been extracted from the
_British Museum Catalogue of Printed Books_. _The Catalogue of the
Harleian Manuscripts_ in the British Museum has yielded _The Historie
of Bohemia_, written presumably in the first quarter of the seventeenth
century. Items of minor value were obtained from the _State Papers of John
Thurloe_; the _Harleian Miscellany, or a collection of scarce, curious and
entertaining Pamphlets and Tracts_; Robert Watts’ _Bibliotheca Britannica,
or a General Index to British and Foreign Literature_. For numerous
current items the authors are indebted to _Poole’s Index to Periodical
Literature_ and the _Readers’ Guide to Periodical Literature_.

The reader will probably agree with the present authors that but for
Bohemia’s Protestant past, Anglo-American Bohemica would be practically
non-existent. Strip the source book of Hus, of the events which followed
the Reformation and the anti-Reformation, of the United Brethren and
their alleged offspring, the Moravians, of Komenský, and Bohemia would
stand before the Anglo-American world like Cinderella from the fairy
tale--unwritten about, still waiting to be discovered.

The bibliography proper is subdivided into twenty-two parts, a brief
and relevant comment accompanying each part. The respective sub-titles
are: Art, Bibliography, Biography, Bohemian Glass, Dictionaries, Drama,
Fiction, Folk and Fairy Tales, Guides, History, John Hus, John Amos
Komenský, Language and Literature, Miscellany, Music, Periodicals, Plans
and Maps, Politics, Prague, Sociology and Economics, Sokols, Travel
and Description. A separate chapter, entitled Bohemia in the British
State Papers and Manuscripts, contains bibliographical extracts from
the _Calendar of State Papers_, the _Reports of the British Historical
Manuscripts Commission_, the _Reports of the Royal Commission on
Historical Manuscripts_, _Papal Registers_, etc.

The especial acknowledgments of the authors are due to Prof. Will
S. Monroe, author of _Bohemia and the Čechs_, and to Mr. Leonard C.
Wharton of London. Prof. Monroe kindly read and compared with his own,
the bibliography on Komenský. The material which Mr. Wharton has sent
from England emphasizes anew the enthusiastic interest he takes in the
language, history and literature of the Bohemian people.

ART. Reference is made in this biographical manual to the work of three
artists. The first is Václav Holar of Prácheň, or Wenceslaus Hollar, as
his name was spelled in England. A Protestant exile, whom the edicts of
anti-reformation had driven from his home, Hollar drifted to England,
where he gained the reputation as the foremost etcher of his time.
His plates, which number about 2,400 pieces, are highly prized by art
collectors. “He drew plans, prospects and portraits; habits and dresses;
churches, monuments and antiquaries, or etched designs by famous Italian,
German, Dutch and English masters, some done from the collection of King
Charles I. and especially from those belonging to Thomas Earl of Arundel,
who brought Hollar to and supported him in England.” (Vertue). Born in
1607 in Prague, he was buried in St. Margaret’s, Westminster, 28th of
March, 1677. He showed the lasting attachment to his fatherland by signing
many of his works “Wenceslaus Hollar Bohemus.”

[Illustration: Anne of Bohemia (1366-1394)

Daughter of Charles IV., wife of Richard II. of England]

Václav Brožík (1851-1901) was a noted painter of historic subjects. His
greatest picture is “Master John Hus condemned to death by the Council
of Constance,” now the property of the municipality of Prague. American
art lovers will remember Brožík’s “Defenestration, or thrown from the
window at Prague,” exhibited at the Chicago World’s Fair. The New York
Metropolitan Museum of Art owns a large canvas by him, “Columbus at the
Court of Ferdinand and Isabella.” The Lenox Library (now the New York
Public Library) has “Rudolph II. in the Laboratory of his Alchymist,” and
“The Grandmother’s Namesday.” “As a historical painter, Brožík equals
the greatest by his breadth of conception, fine composition, strength of
work and dramatic effect.” This is the estimate of the painter by Mr.
Larroument, Secretary of the French _Académie des Beaux Arts_. For his art
galleries in New York and Philadelphia, John Wanamaker purchased several
of the artist’s smaller themes, and from his executors the entire contents
of his Paris studio, studies, sketches, antiques, draperies and hangings.

Alfons M. Mucha, born in 1860 in Moravia, earned his spurs in Paris as
a poster artist. He is not unknown in the United States, having visited
this country on two or three occasions, working here as portraitist,
illustrator and interior decorator. For several years he has been engaged
on a series of allegories intended to portray the historical development
of the Slavs. When finished, the canvases are to be presented to the City
of Prague as the gift of the well-known Slavophile, Charles R. Crane of
Chicago and New York.

BIBLIOGRAPHY. So far as the writers know, no one has before this concerned
himself with a systematic compilation of a bibliography of this kind. The
late Herman Rosenthal, Director of the Slavonic Department of the New York
Public Library, is said to have been at work on a Slavic bibliography;
but his literary executors have not yet published it. Dr. A. Sum, member
of the English Club in Prague, has taken more than a passing interest in
English Bohemica. The late Jeffrey D. Hrbek, an exceptionally gifted young
man (see his biography published posthumously), prepared for the _Osvěta
Americká_ (1908) what was then considered to be a fairly exhaustive
bibliography. The list mentions ninety volumes, many of them containing
but remote and irrelevant allusions to Bohemia. The bibliography appended
to Miss Balch’s _Our Slavic Fellow Citizens_ is quite considerable;
however, this work treats not of Bohemians alone, but of all the Slavs,
and, when the process of elimination is applied, it will be seen that the
purely Bohemian share of reference books is small. Then there is Leonard
C. Wharton’s list, printed in the _Guide to the Kingdom of Bohemia_; this
takes notice of thirty-five items. As regards the Hus and the Moravian
Church literatures, Wm. Gunn Malin’s catalogue is, without doubt, the
richest and the most valuable of all.

BIOGRAPHY. Biographical material in the several encyclopædias is meagre
and perfunctory and what there is of it has been chiefly extracted
from German lexicons. Count Lützow edited items on Bohemia for the
_Encyclopædia Britannica_. J. J. Král has written for _Johnson’s Universal
Cyclopædia_ short biographical sketches of several authors--Jungmann,
Kollár, Němcová, Neruda and the Jirečeks among them. The _Biographical
Dictionary of the Library of the World’s Best Literature_ contains the
lives of some two dozen men of letters. Injudiciously the editor of the
_Biographical Dictionary_ has included among Bohemian (Čech) writers
Charles Sealsfield (pseudonym of Karl Anton Postl, by some written Postel)
and Fritz Mauthner. While it is true that the first named was born in
Moravia and the other in Bohemia, both Sealsfield and Mauthner were, as a
matter of fact, Germans.

P. Selver in his _Anthology of Modern Bohemian Poetry_ gives, besides
specimens of their verse, an illuminating account of the lives of a number
of poets. The biographies of the literary workers of old Bohemia are
treated adequately in Lützow’s _History of Bohemian Literature_.

No Čech has been more written about than Hus; and, incidentally, none
has shed greater lustre on his native land than he. Every volume dealing
with the causes and effects of the Reformation necessarily considers
Hus’s part therein. Associated with Hus usually appears the name of his
fellow-martyr, Jerome of Prague.

Biographies of Komenský are not wanting, for which thanks are due
principally to educators the world over, who regard Komenský’s writings as
milestones in the progress of education.

Music, speaking as it does a language which is universally understood,
has granted a passport to Anton Dvořák and in a lesser degree to Bedřich
Smetana and Zděnek Fibich.

The interested public will find many portraits and life sketches in
Vicker’s, Gregor’s, Maurice’s and Monroe’s volumes. Some have been
published in _The Bohemian Voice_; however, complete files of this
magazine are now exceedingly rare.

BOHEMIAN GLASS is renowned everywhere for its excellence and beauty.
The industry is an old one and there are some two thousand shops and
factories in the country engaged in the making of it. As an export article
Bohemian glass constitutes a major item.

DICTIONARIES. GRAMMARS. INTERPRETERS. Adolf William Straka, (died in
London in 1872), a political exile, who lived for years in England,
becoming a British subject, was the first to write an _English Bohemian
Grammar_. It was printed in Prague in 1862.

The first English Bohemian dictionary, by Charles Jonáš, was published
in Racine, Wisconsin. Before emigrating to the United States in 1863,
Jonáš spent some time in London. In the English metropolis he associated
with Straka and the inference is that the author of the _English Bohemian
Grammar_ inspired a liking for lexicographical work in his younger
fellow-exile.

Charles Jonáš, the “first Bohemian in America” was born in 1840 and died
abroad in 1896 while serving the United States in the capacity of Consul.
He was buried in Prague, “in the land he loved above all else.” Although
he was not a philologist by training, having studied in a technological
institute, he plunged courageously into lexicography. His introductory
work was the _Bohemian English Interpreter_ (1865), followed by the
_Dictionary of the English and Bohemian Languages_ (1876). Like every
initial effort, the dictionary was deficient in many respects. Each
succeeding edition, however, was improved and amplified, so that now
Jonáš’ dictionaries compare favorably with like German publications.
Other American Bohemians have achieved political distinction in the
United States (Jonáš was successively State Senator, Lieutenant Governor
of Wisconsin and U. S. Consul at Prague), yet Jonáš the journalist, Jonáš
the author, Jonáš the politician had not, in the estimation of pioneer
immigrants, an equal among his American co-nationals.

F. B. Zdrůbek’s _Anglická mluvnice_ (1870) is the earliest publication
of its kind in America. Crude typographically and faulty textually, the
volume is a compliment neither to the printer nor to the author. Jonáš and
Zdrůbek, one will observe, worked along parallel lines. This is explained
by the circumstance that the two men were attached to two rival newspaper
and printing concerns--Jonáš to the weekly _Slavie_ published in Racine,
and Zdrůbek to the daily _Svornost_ of Chicago.

F. B. Zdrůbek, for over thirty years editor of the Chicago _Svornost_,
and one of the leaders of the Bohemian rationalists in the United States,
was born in 1842 and died in Chicago in 1911. He took a course first in a
Catholic, then in a Protestant theological seminary. Convinced that “as
a minister of the gospel he could not make an honorable living unless
he chose to make of his vocation a vulgar traffic and practiced from
the pulpit pious extortion,” as he wrote in his autobiography, he gave
up the ministry and devoted himself to journalism. Most prolific of all
the American Bohemian men of letters, Zdrůbek was in fact not a creative
writer but a translator. As a journalist he was distinctly commonplace.

Jaroslav J. Zmrhal, teacher in a Chicago school, has given the public in
his _Anglicky snadno ve třiceti úlohách_, one of the best hand-books for
the learning of the English language thus far compiled. Zmrhal’s method of
pronunciation is clearly an improvement over all previous books; certainly
it is superior to Zdrůbek’s, who after all, possessed but a book knowledge
of English.

Last, but not least, is a comprehensive _Učebnice_ by F. Francl of New
York. Altogether it may be stated that grammars and interpreters by
American Bohemians who know alike the vocabulary and the spirit of the
English tongue, are more serviceable, if not wholly superior to most of
the “English Easy and Quick” hand-books which have been published in
Prague.

The most versatile linguist in Bohemia was Francis Vymazal (1841-1917),
who compiled a lengthy row of manuals of the “English at a glance” type.
Vymazal’s series includes the study of English, Bulgarian, Russian,
French, Hebrew, Dutch, Latin, Magyar, German, Gypsy, Modern Greek, Polish,
Portuguese, Rumanian, Slovak, Slovene, Serbo-Croatian, Old Greek, Spanish,
Turkish and Italian. Owing to his manner of life and dress--he was not
afraid to lead the life of a lowly proletarian--the people of Brno, in
which city he lived and died, nicknamed him “Bohemian Diogenes.”

DRAMA. That the Poles and the Bohemians, two submerged nations, have each
given to the American stage a tragic actress--the Poles Helena Modjeska,
the Bohemians Frances Janauschek--may and may not be accidental. Many
people have supposed Janauschek to be a German tragedienne, because in the
early years of her career, before she mastered the English language, she
played in German, on the German stage. But she was of pure Bohemian stock,
born in Prague in 1830. By virtue of her long residence in America and her
devotion to and life-long association with the American stage, she was
really an American actress.

FICTION. Translations from fiction are disappointingly few. Of course,
this is no evidence that Bohemia has no fiction writers; the truth is that
she has not found Isabella Hapgoods and Jeremiah Curtins to translate
what she has. With one notable exception, Božena Němcová’s _Babička_,
nothing worth note has been rendered into English from the prose. The
story _Maria Felicia_ by Karolina Světlá, which an American Bohemian
woman has translated into English, is no more typical of Bohemia than it
is of Finland, Spain or any other country. One should not only know how
to translate, but, what is just as essential, what to translate. A. V.
Šmilovský, whose story, _Nebesa_, the Moureks translated, is a meritorious
writer, but by no means of the high type of Alois Jirásek or Julius Zeyer.

Several foreign writers of fiction have made use of a Bohemian theme
more or less successfully, the earliest of them being George Sand.
Unfortunately Sand’s Bohemians in _Consuelo_ and in its sequel _The
Countess of Rudolstadt_, are about as real as Robinson Crusoe’s Man
Friday.

FOLK AND FAIRY TALES. Karel Jaromír Erben (1811-1870), whose folk tales
Rev. Wratislaw translated into English, is recognized as an authority on
folk lore. “If Erben had left nothing else but his _Nosegay of National
Folk Tales_, his name would always rank among Bohemian writers of the
first magnitude,” says a critic. Most of the writers of folk tales here
listed have borrowed from Erben.

THE GUIDE TO THE KINGDOM OF BOHEMIA, published in Prague in 1906, is
primarily intended to attract travelers to the ancient capital of the
country; however, the information it contains is of interest alike to
travelers and to non-travelers.

HISTORY. Probably the first instance in which the English and the
Bohemians came into contact with each other, although as foes on the
field of battle, occurred in 1346 at the battle of Crécy. Here fell,
fighting on the side of the French, against the English, John of Luxemburg,
the blind King of Bohemia. King John’s crest was three ostrich feathers
and his motto “I serve”; which the Prince of Wales and his successors
adopted in memorial of this great victory of the English.

A more agreeable event in the relationship of England and Bohemia took
place thirty-six years later (1382), when Richard II. engaged himself to
Anne of Luxemburg, the granddaughter of the very ruler whom the English
had fought at Crécy. The popular though erroneous belief is that through
Queen Anne the writings of Wicliffe were introduced into Bohemia. In her
readable _Lives of the Queens of England_, Agnes Strickland devotes a few
warmly written pages to “Anne of Bohemia, surnamed the Good, first Queen
of Richard II.”

The gallant knight, Sir Simon Burley, the English ambassador, was
charged with bringing Richard’s bride from Prague to London. “England
was to Bohemia a sort of terra incognita; and as a general knowledge of
geography and statistics was certainly not among the list of imperial
accomplishments in the fourteenth century, the empress (Anne’s mother)
despatched duke Primislaus of Saxony on a voyage of discovery, to
ascertain, for the satisfaction of herself and the princess what sort
of country England might be.”[2]

  [2] Agnes Strickland: _Lives of the Queens of England_, v. 1, p. 592.

England may have seemed an out of the way land to the Bohemians of old,
yet the English people were by no means unknown to them. The fondness
of the Bohemians for travel in foreign countries was well known.[3]
That entertaining compilation of wonder-stories comprised in _Sir John
Mandeville’s Travels_ was translated at an early date into the national
language. Students from Bohemia were wont to go to the universities at
Oxford and Paris in order to broaden their education. Jerome of Prague is
known to have studied at Oxford. Like others of his countrymen he had been
drawn thither by the fame of Wicliff’s name.

  [3] See in History: Wratislaw’s _Adventures_; Šašek’s _Diary of an
  Embassy_. The Embassy which Šašek describes was led by Leo z Rožmitálu
  (Leo von Rosmital), a highly distinguished personage. The Embassy,
  or mission, consisted of forty persons with fifty-two horses and a
  Kamer-wagon and set out from Prague November 26, 1465. Šašek (Shassek)
  relates how, when the mission reached London (p. 430) “crowds assembled
  in the streets to stare at these Bohemian Samsons and Absolons.” In
  London they remained for forty days, being feasted by the King and the
  nobility. At Dunkirk they (the Bohemians) caught the first view of the
  sea--Shakespeare’s description of Bohemia in the _Winter’s Tale_ as
  “desert country near the sea” to the contrary notwithstanding.

Most readers will be surprised to learn that a Bohemian had been one
of the torchbearers of Reformation in Scotland. The name of this minor
reformer is Paul of Kravař or Crawar, as Scotch writers spell the name.
According to Burton[4] “Crawar was a German, believed to have come from
Bohemia to propose the doctrines that had been preached by John Hus and
Jerome of Prague. All that we are told of him personally is that he
professed to be a physician, and to be traveling and visiting in the
practice of his calling.” Kravař was burned at St. Andrews, July 23, 1433,
as a heretic Hussite. “The churchman who records his burning,” relates
Burton, “takes occasion to enlarge on the characteristics of Taborites
and other Bohemian heretics.” Lang[5] states that “he was an envoy of the
Hussite ‘miscreants.’ Lawrence of Lindores attacked him, but he found him
well read in scriptures.”

  [4] John Hill Burton: _The History of Scotland_, v. 3, p. 114. The lords
  of Kravař were an ancient Bohemian family, who took a prominent part in
  the affairs of their nation already in the thirteenth century. Certain
  branches of the family were strong Hussite partisans.

  [5] Andrew Lang: _History of Scotland, from the Roman Occupation_, v. 1,
  pp. 310-11.

[Illustration: John Hus

Portrait by Hans Holbein]

At no time before or after have the English taken a more genuine interest
in Bohemia and her affairs than during the events which followed the
outbreak of the Thirty Years’ War. Their concern over what was happening
in Bohemia at that time was due, mainly, to two reasons. The first was
that an Englishwoman, a daughter of the reigning family, had been elevated
to the dignity of queen of that country. The second motive was a religious
one. Bohemia lay in the direct zone of the conflict raging between
Catholicism and Protestantism and Protestant England could not but be
gravely concerned over the fate of Protestant Bohemia. Money was collected
and troops were raised to sustain the cause of the Stuart Queen in Prague
and incidentally of Protestantism and it has been said that if James
had given his daughter the support which she and her husband expected
from him, Bohemia’s position might have been wholly different today.
But “King James,” a historian tells us, “never stood greatly affected,
either to this war, or to the cause thereof and thereupon some regiments
of inexperienced volunteers going over, instead of a well composed army,
it was one reason, among many others, that not only Bohemia, but the
Palatinate were also lost....”

Elizabeth graced the Bohemian throne only for a few months between
1619-1620, but she insisted upon bearing the title of Queen of Bohemia
to the end of her days (1596-1662). Likewise her husband, Frederick,
(1596-1632) “was resolved to foregoe not the title of the King of Bohemia
that he hath allreadie gotten.”

All Britain rejoiced when Elizabeth the “Pearl of the Stuarts” was wedded
to Frederick of the Palatinate. John Taylor, the Water-Poet, wrote a
poem about the “beloved Marriage of the two peerelesse Paragons of
Christendome.” Historians have dutifully chronicled the event of “the
most blessed and happie marriage betweene the High and Mightie Prince
Frederick the Fifth, Count Palatine of the Rhein, Duke of Bavier, etc. And
the most Vertvous, Gracious and thrice excellent Princesse, Elizabeth,
Sole Daughter to our dread Soueraigne, James by the grace of God, King of
Great Britaine, France and Ireland, etc., celebrated at White-Hall the
fourteenth of Februarie, 1612.”

In 1619, the Bohemian Protestant Estates deposed their King and offered
the crown to Frederick, in the hope that the “King of England would,
out of his three kingdoms, send such a continued stock of men to the
Palatinate, that the crown of Bohemia should be established on the head
of the Elector Palatinate and that by no course sooner than by virtue
of the English arms.”

We read of the “Departure of the high and mightie Prince Frederick King
Elect of Bohemia: With his royall and vertuous Ladie Elizabeth: And the
thryse hopefull yong Prince Henrie, from Heydelberg towards Prague, to
receive the Crowne of that Kingdome. Whereunto is annexed the Solempnitie
or maner of the Coronation.”

On another page the reader will find a quaint account of the coronation
ceremonies in Prague written by an eyewitness, presumably John Harrison.

On the 8th day of November, 1620, near Prague, on the slopes of the White
Hill (Bílá Hora), was fought a fateful battle between the Imperialists
(Austrians) and the Bohemian Army.

Referring to this catastrophal battle, which cost Bohemia her independence,
Sir Charles Montagu, English Ambassador stationed at Vienna wrote to his
kinsman, Sir Edward Montagu: “To begin with the worst first, there is news
come now of more certain truth than heretofore from Bohemya, which is that
the King’s army hath had a great overthrow, and Prage is lost, but the
King and Queen are at a strong place called Presslaw in Selecya, and the
King of Hungary and he have met and they both intend to raise a far greater
force to set on them (the Imperialists) suddenly; God give them better
success.”

The King of Bohemia, as subsequent events proved, did not meet with better
success. In a day or two after that fatal 8th day of November, when
Bohemia was going to her destruction, he left Prague precipitately with
his queen, never to return to that capital....

Bohemian historians speak in terms of warm praise of Elizabeth, the
“Winter Queen,” but their estimate of Frederick, “First Prince of the
Imperiall bloud, sprung from glorious Charlemaigne,” falls lamentably
short of the measure taken of him by the Bohemian Estates, as reprinted
on another page.

Conceivably for the “Winter Queen’s” enlightenment, John Harrison, who
accompanied the royal pair to Prague in the capacity of court chaplain,
sketched the “Historie of Bohemia, the first parte describing the
Countrye, Scituation, Climate, Commodities, the Name and Nature of the
People and compendiously continuing the Historie from the beginning of
the Nation to the First Christian Prince, about the year of Christ 990.”

Speaking “in the name of all our exiled nation” the Bohemian Church
appealed for help “to the lord protector, his highness council, and the
parliament.”[6]

  [6] John Thurloe: _Collection of State Papers_, v. 2, p. 441.

As in the case of the Waldenses, Protector Cromwell ordered a national
subscription; and a handsome amount was collected during the spring of
1658 to relieve the distress of Bohemian Protestants. Komenský and his
fellow exiles were invited to settle in Ireland, the Protector desiring to
strengthen the Protestant element there. The “Act for the Satisfaction of
Adventurers and Soldiers” authorized “all persons of what nation soever
professing the Protestant religion to rent or purchase forfeited lands,”
but the Dutch, German and Bohemian emigrants whom this clause contemplated
never came.[7] Believing in the fulfillment of Drabík’s false prophecy,
that the cause of Protestantism in Bohemia would prevail in the end and
that the exiles would yet return home in triumph, Komenský hesitated to
accept England’s proffer.

  [7] Charles Harding Firth: _The Last Years of the Protectorate,
  1656-1658_. Also Vaughn: _Protectorate of Cromwell_, v. II, p. 447.

Protestant refugees, who had been driven from home by Ferdinand’s edicts,
wandered to England in pursuit of religious freedom and livelihood.
Simon Partlicius (1593-1639), preacher and author and Samuel Martinius
(1588-1640), writer and mathematician, both enjoyed England’s hospitality
for a time. So did Komenský who came in 1642 to London to visit friends
and to further his literary projects. Wenceslaus Hollar established a
permanent residence in England. Letters are extant written by Komenský’s
son-in-law, Peter Figulus, and dated at Oxford. At least two exiles,
Wenceslaus Libanus and Paul Hartmann, both members of the Brethren’s
Unity, had been ordained as ministers of the Church of England.

That the Irish Franciscans had been invited to Bohemia during the Thirty
Years’ War to assist in the re-Catholisation of the country, is known.
In Hybernská ulice, a famous thoroughfare in Prague, named after them,
the Irish Friars founded a monastery in 1630. Later (1659) they built
there the Church of Our Lady of Immaculate Conception. Although the
monastery has long passed out of existence and even the church edifice
has been forced to give way to business, the name, Hybernská ulice, still
reminds the tourist of the presence of the Hibernians in Prague. An Irish
name--that of Count Edward Francis Josef Taafe--has figured largely in
Austrian and Bohemian politics of yesterday. The Taafes secured an
incholate in Moravia in the middle of the eighteenth century and have
intermarried with the Šlik, Chotek and Pachta families.

No narrative of the Thirty Years’ War is complete or understandable
unless the student knows what part Bohemia took in the great struggle.
A recognized authority on the subject is Anton Gindely, (1829-1892)
Professor at the Prague University. Gindely’s _Geschichte des
dreissigjährigen Krieges_ has been translated by A. Ten Brook.

A quarter of a century ago one could not find on the shelves of an
American library a comprehensive history of the Bohemian nation written
in English. The task and the distinction of writing such a work fell to
the lot of a Chicago lawyer of Scotch-Irish ancestry, Robert H. Vickers.
Vicker’s _History of Bohemia_ was published in 1894 in Chicago, the
munificence of the Bohemian National Committee making the publication
possible. Stranger to the subtle modern forces of the nation’s life,
unfamiliar with its language, unduly in love with the rust of the past,
Vickers produced a volume suffering obviously from bookiness. The Chicago
Bohemians erected a monument in the National Cemetery to the memory of
their Scotch-Irish friend.

A year later (1895), there appeared another history of the nation: Frances
Gregor’s _Story of Bohemia_.

In translating into idiomatic English the little classic, Němcová’s
_Babička_--the first story book by a Bohemian author to be so
honored--Frances Gregor rendered an actual service to literature. Many
an American Bohemian youth has had his or her first glimpse of the charms
of Bohemian country life from _Babička_, but her _Story of Bohemia_ has
since been supplanted by newer and abler historical studies. Frances
Gregor’s talents lay not in historical research but in light fiction
writing and literary criticism. An incurable malady greatly interfered
with intensive literary labor, making her life all but unendurable. She
died in Colorado in 1901, aged fifty-one years.

Two additional histories were put on the market by publishers in 1896:
_Bohemia: an Historical Sketch_, by Count Lützow; and Charles Edmund
Maurice’s _Bohemia: from the earliest times to the fall of national
independence in 1620_.

It is no secret that English Bohemica cost Count Lützow (born 1849 in
Hamburg, died 1916 in Switzerland) his diplomatic career, making him
_persona non grata_ at the Vienna court. Of the several volumes written
by this high-minded, unselfish nobleman, the most erudite and mature is
_The Hussite Wars_. Lützow is especially esteemed by English-speaking
Bohemians, for they alone are able to appreciate the measure of his labors.

Will S. Monroe’s _Bohemia and the Čechs_ was published in 1910. It
is profusely illustrated and contains an informative review of the
literature, art, politics and the economic and social conditions of the
people. Monroe knows his Bohemia from close personal association and
not from books alone, and his _Bohemia and the Čechs_ has achieved wider
popularity than any of the accounts preceding it.

In the _Cambridge Modern History_ the student will find abundant and
reliable material on Bohemia, from such noted writers as Robert Nisbet
Bain, A. W. Ward, Louis Eisenmann, and others.

JOHN HUS. JEROME OF PRAGUE. UNITY. MORAVIANS. The Hussite Reformation
in the fifteenth century was a movement which concerned not Bohemia
alone, but the entire Christian world. “Thus begun,” remarks Bishop de
Schweinitz, “one of the most remarkable and at the same time terrific
wars the world has seen; for sixteen years Bohemia single handed defied
papal Europe.” Two Englishmen, John Wickliffe and Peter Payne, the first
impersonally, through his writings, the other personally, played not an
inconspicuous rôle in the great religious awakening which followed the
burning of Hus at the stake in 1415.

The Hussite literature, as the reader will perceive, is quite bulky. Of
the non-Bohemian Hus scholars, whose works have been written in English or
translated into that tongue, these deserve to be mentioned: De Bonnechose,
_Les Réformateurs avant la Réforme_, known as _Reformers before the
Reformation_; Johann Loserth’s _Hus und Wiclif_; De Schweinitz’s _History
of the Church known as the Unitas Fratrum, or the Unity of the Brethren_;
Count Lützow’s _The Hussite Wars_; David S. Schaff’s _John Huss; His
Life, Teachings and Death_; W. N. Schwarze’s _John Hus, the Martyr of
Bohemia_. Knowing the Bohemian language and being in a position to make
use of native sources, some of them still unpublished, Count Lützow has
had an undoubted advantage over Hus commentators who were not so fitted.
Rev. E. H. Gillett’s _Life and Times of John Huss_, was, after it had been
published, adversely commented upon, the author being openly charged with
taking bodily sentences, paragraphs and pages from De Bonnechose, without
giving the Frenchman due credit. (See _North American Review_, July,
1865.) Rev. A. H. Wratislaw’s _John Huss, the commencement of resistance
to papal authority_, has for its basis the trustworthy researches of the
historians Palacký and Tomek.

The Moravian Church, claiming direct descent from the Unity of Bohemian
Brethren, has produced noteworthy sectarian literature. In fact, the
Moravians, to mention only one scholar, the late Bishop de Schweinitz,
have done more than any other evangelical church in the way of
interpreting to the English speaking people the most stirring chapters
of Bohemian history.

There is this criticism to be made, however, in reference to the Hus
literature, that while non-Bohemian writers regard Hus as a religious
reformer only and treat the reformation inaugurated by him wholly in the
light of a religious upheaval, the Bohemians insist on taking a broader
view of Hus and of Hussites. To them Hus reveals himself not only as
a religious reformer, but likewise as a champion and purifier of the
native tongue. In the Hussite Wars they recognize a political-spiritual
revolution, having for its purpose the liberation of the Bohemian nation
alike from papal trammels and from German domination.

The Bohemian Church, Unity, Unitas Fratrum, Unity of Bohemian Brethren,
Brethren’s Unity, are the names given to a church which originated in the
second half of the fifteenth century. In the severely strict notions as
to what is proper in the practice of religious duties, the Unity bore a
striking resemblance to the Puritans.

Its doctrine and discipline are admirably set forth in the articles
passed in 1616 at the Synod of Žeravice. These articles, provided with
annotations by Komenský have been translated into English, under the
title _Ratio disciplinae, or the Constitution of the Congregational
Churches_. Thus one is able to trace the influence of the Unity upon the
Church of England. When the Bohemian Revolution broke out (1618) the
nobility belonging to the Unity were powerful enough to influence the
selection of a new King in the place of Ferdinand II., who was dethroned
by the Estates. The choice, as we know, fell upon Frederick of the
Palatinate. The Patent of Tolerance, (1781) allowing Protestant worship
in Austria, purposely excluded the Unity. To the Government the church
was objectionable, first because of its Bohemian national traditions,
and secondly because of the leading part its members had taken in the
revolution against Ferdinand.

[Illustration: Protest

Dated Sept. 2, 1415, by 100 Bohemian Lords against the burning of John
Hus. Since 1657 property of the University of Edinburgh]

Some of the greatest writers of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries
were members of the Unity: John Augusta (1500-1572, Bishop and writer),
John Blahoslav (1523-1571), collaborator on the _Kralice Bible_, author
of _Grammatika Česká_, Charles, Lord of Žerotín (1564-1636), John Amos
Komenský. The Unity reformed schools and promoted literature by setting up
printing shops in Bohemia and Moravia. Toward the close of the fifteenth
century a printing shop was opened in Mladá Boleslav; in the first part of
the sixteenth century another was established at Bělá, near Bezděz, and
still another at Litomyšl. The last named town was, up to 1547, looked
upon as the chief seat of the administration of the church. Because of
persecution, the Unity transferred its centre to Přerov in Moravia. Here
too, it set up printing establishments, the one at Ivančice becoming
in time far-famed. In 1578 the Ivančice concern was moved to Kralice
(Moravia).

By common consent, the _Kralice Bible_, so called from Kralice, where it
was printed, is regarded as the most enduring literary work of the Unity.
For fourteen years eight eminent scholars worked on this Bible, rendering
the translation into a language idiomatic, and pure beyond that of any
other book. It was published between the years 1579-93, and Lord Žerotín
bore the expense of it. The British Bible Society in publishing a Bohemian
Bible followed exactly the edition of 1613.

The New York Lenox Library, which is now a part of the New York Public
Library, owns: 1. A complete set of the _Kralice Bible_; the sixth volume,
however, is of a later edition. 2. Two copies of the _Prague Bible_. 3.
One copy of the _Paul Severín of Kapí Hora Bible_ of the edition of 1537.
The _Kralice Bible_ was bought by Lenox, the founder of the Lenox Library,
from the collection of the Duke of Sussex.[8]

  [8] See article _Moravští Bratři v Americe_ by Thomas Čapek, _Osvěta_,
  Prague. 19:565-72. 1889.

JOHN AMOS KOMENSKÝ. John Amos Komenský (or Comenius, which is the
Latinized form of the name), one of the great figures in Bohemian history,
was born in 1592 in Moravia, (hence the suffix “Moravus” seen on some of
his works) and died as an exile in 1670 in Holland.

Though he was a churchman of prominence, being the last Bishop of
the Unity, his reputation is founded not on his ecclesiastical and
philosophical writings, but on his pedagogical studies. As a school
reformer he was the first to carry out the principle, long since
recognized as sound by all teachers, of appealing to the senses; so he
called the artist to his aid. The result was the _Orbis Sensualium Pictus_
or the _Visible World_. “The circumstances of his life were as unfavorable
as possible to his career as a writer,” remarks Lützow. “Traveling
from Moravia to Bohemia, thence to Poland, Germany, England, Sweden,
Hungary, Holland, ever unable to obtain tranquillity, often in financial
difficulties, twice deprived of his library by fire, forced to write
school-books, when he was planning metaphysical works that he believed
to be of the greatest value, he always undauntedly continued his vast
literary undertakings.”

From Cotton Mather[9] we learn (a fact which is confirmed by other
sources) that Governor Winthrop offered to Komenský the Presidency of
Harvard College. “That brave old man Johannes Amos Comenius, the fame
of whose worth hath been Trumpetted as far as more than Three Languages
(Whereof everyone is endebted unto his Janua) could carry it, was agreed
withal by our Mr. Winthrop, in his travels through the Low Countries, to
come over into New England and Illuminate this Colledge and Country in the
Quality of President: But the Solicitations of the Swedish ambassador,
diverting him another way, that Incomparable Moravian became not an
American.”

  [9] _Magnalia Christi Americana_; or, _The Ecclesiastical History of New
  England_. Book IX., p. 128.

Biographers are not agreed as to the number of Komenský’s works. F. J.
Zoubek has enumerated 137 of them; Keatinge lists 127. Some were written
in Latin, others in Bohemian, though Komenský, having received his
theological training in Germany, was conversant with the language of that
country also.

As a master of Bohemian diction he had few, if any, peers. To the
revivalists Komenský’s writings were a safe and never-failing storehouse
of philologic material and even today, despite the circumstance that
Bohemian syntax and orthography like the English, have undergone an
essential change, his style is a source of delight to literary purists.

His chief writings that have been translated into English, and the main
facts of their publication, are as follows:

_The Gate of Tongues Unlocked_ first appeared in Latin in Leszno (Lissa),
Poland, in 1631; the same year in German. The Bohemian edition is dated
1633, the English 1633.

_The School of Infancy._ This manual was written primarily for the use of
Bohemian schools, but when the author realized that he could not return to
his fatherland, being a Protestant, the work was translated into German.
The English edition is dated 1641. The Bohemian manuscript was discovered
only in 1856 and put into print two years later.

_A Reformation of Schooles_ was printed for Michael Sparke, London, 1642.

_The History of the Bohemian Persecution_, which is one of the author’s
church works, was completed in Bohemian in 1632, but was not published
in that tongue until 1655. The date of the Latin version is 1647; of the
English, 1650.

Jeremy Collier’s rendering into English of the _Pansophiae_, or, as the
translator entitled it, _Patterne of Universall Knowledge_, is dated,
London, 1651. Published in 1643, in Danzig, it was printed two years later
in Amsterdam. The Bohemian translation is quite recent, dating from 1879.
“No one can impartially claim for Komenský a high rank as a philosopher,”
comments Count Lützow, “and it is certainly a mistake to speak of
Komenský’s system of philosophy. There is no philosophical system of
Komenský in the sense that there exists a philosophical system of Spinoza.”

_The Physicae_ or _Naturall Philosophie Reformed by Divine Light_ was
printed in Leipsic in 1633, in Amsterdam 1643, 1645, 1663, etc. The
Bohemian translation is recent. The English edition, in this catalogue,
is of 1651.

_The True and Readie Way to Learne the Latine Tongue_ appeared in Leszno,
1633. It was translated later into Dutch, English (our catalogue’s London
edition is of 1654), Magyar, Swedish and Polish. The Latin-Bohemian-German
edition is dated Trenčín, Hungary, 1649.

Komenský’s most popular book, the _Orbis Sensualium Pictus_, was printed
originally in Nuremberg, in 1658. The English translation by Charles Hoole
followed one year later. The Latin-German-Magyar-Bohemian edition was
issued in 1685; the first American edition, a reprint from Hoole’s twelfth
London edition, in New York, in 1810.

That the English translation of _The Great Didactic_, which Komenský wrote
between 1627-1632 in the Bohemian language and in 1640 in Latin (published
in Amsterdam, 1657), was not undertaken until our time (1896) is a matter
of great surprise. The same comment is pertinent to Komenský’s most
readable little volume, _The Labyrinth of the World and the Paradise of
the Heart_, which strikingly reminds one of Bunyan’s _Pilgrim’s Progress_.
It was only in 1905 that it found an able translator in the person of
Count Lützow. _The Praxis Pietatis_, an oft-quoted book which passed
through several editions in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries has
not been translated for the very good reason that it, in itself, was an
adaptation, from the _Practice of Piety_, a volume by an English divine.

_The Exhortation of the Churches of Bohemia to the Church of England_,
Englished by Joshua Tymarchus and printed for Thomas Parkhurst, in
Cheapside, 1661, was used eighty-seven years later as an argument and a
plea by a distinguished English American, Gen. Oglethorpe.

Addressing the English Parliament (1748) in favor of the passage of a
bill to relieve the United Brethren, or Moravians, from military duty and
oaths, General Oglethorpe explained that the “Brethren were received
in England under King Edward the Sixth, and countenanced under his
successors.... And to speak a few words of their further intercourse with
the Church of England. Their Bishop, Comenius, presented the history of
his church to King Charles the Second, in the year 1660, with a moving
account of their sufferings, addressed to the Church of England.... In
the year 1683, a most pathetic account of these Brethren was published by
order of Archbishop Sancroft and Bishop Compton. They also addressed the
Church of England, in the year 1715, being reduced to a very low ebb in
Poland; and his late Majesty, George I., by the recommendation of the late
Archbishop Wake, gave orders in Council for the relief of these reformed
episcopal churches, and Letters Patent for their support were issued soon
after.”

The prognostications made in _Revelation Revealed by two Apocalyptical
Treatises_, is a book which relates to prophecies and alleged visions by
Christopher Kotter, Christina Poniatovia and an unscrupulous impostor,
Nichols Drabík by name. Genuinely believing in the truth of the prophecies
of this trio, Komenský was ridiculed and criticized by contemporaries,
especially by the Frenchman, Pierre Bayle (1647-1706) in his _Dictionnaire
Historique et Critique_. Hallam’s belittling appraisal of the author of
_Orbis Sensualium Pictus_ (“this author, a man of much industry, some
ingenuity, and a little judgment, made himself a temporary reputation by
his _Orbis Sensualium Pictus_, etc.”) is no doubt traceable to Bayle’s
unfavorable estimate. Bayle’s writings, be it remarked, were held in high
regard by men of letters of his time.

In 1892 educators the world over observed the three hundredth anniversary
of Komenský’s birth. The March (1892) number of the _Educational Review_
was wholly devoted to him; it contained articles by the editor, Nicholas
Murray Butler (now President of Columbia University), S. S. Laurie, C. W.
Bardeen, Paul H. Hanus. The American Bohemians in several cities, Chicago,
New York, Omaha, Milwaukee and Cleveland, by appropriate ceremonies
also celebrated the anniversary of the birth of their distinguished
fellow-countryman.

LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE. _The Cheskian Anthology_ (1832) compiled by
Sir John Bowring (1792-1872) is the earliest known effort to acquaint
the English reading public with Bohemian literature which was just then
beginning to revive from the débâcle of the Thirty Years’ War. Before
this, Bowring had written a sympathetic review for the _Foreign Quarterly
Review_ (1828) of Joseph Jungmann’s _Historie literatury české_. For the
_Westminster Review_ (1830) he wrote a resumé of the _Manuscript of the
Queen’s Court_ (Rukopis Kralodvorský) since pronounced by philologists,
like Macpherson’s Songs of Ossian, spurious.

Another Englishman who formed a deep attachment for the youthful Bohemian
republic of letters was the Rev. Albert Henry Wratislaw (1821-1889). By
his several translations and original studies Wratislaw rendered valuable
service in England to the nation from which his ancestors had sprung.
Wratislaw claimed descent from the ancient and honorable family of the
Wratislaws of Mitrovic. Conceivably the relationship with the Wratislaws
of Bohemia prompted him to translate into English _The Adventures of Baron
Wenceslas Wratislaw of Mitrowitz_. Wratislaw’s _Bohemian Poems, Ancient
and Modern_, from the original Slavonic (Bohemian) is a skillful piece of
work.

Writing under the pen name Talvj, Mrs. Robinson, wife of the Rev.
Robinson, has devoted a chapter in her _Historical View of the Languages
and Literatures of the Slavonic Nations_ to the _History of the Czekhish
or Bohemian Languages and Literature_. Mrs. Robinson’s views on Bohemian
literature are by no means her own. Palacký and Šafařík have pointed
out that the chapter is nothing but an extract from Paul J. Šafařík’s
_Geschichte der slavischen Sprache und Literatur nach allen Mundarten_.
The pseudonym Talvj, by the way, she conceived by putting together the
initial letters of her maiden name, T. A. L. v. J., that is, Theresa
Albertina Louisa von Jacobi.

Flora P. Kopta’s _Bohemian Legends and Other Poems_ is not a satisfying
work. Far more felicitous than her poetry is her prose volume, _The
Forestman of Vimpek_.

The credit for worthily introducing Bohemian poetry belongs to an
Englishman, P. Selver. _The Anthology of Modern Bohemian Poetry_ is an
admirable achievement. Not only is Selver’s interpretation faithful, but
the selection of authors is representative.

Leo Wiener, a well-known Slavic scholar connected with Harvard University,
has presented to the public a fine rendition of J. S. Machar’s _Magdalen_.

Richard William Morfill (1835-1909), late Slavic Professor at Oxford,
has written voluminously on Slavic history and philology. Among his
philological studies are: a simplified grammar of the Polish language, a
grammar of the Russian language, a grammar of the Bulgarian language, _A
Grammar of the Bohemian or Čech language_. The last named is the only work
of its kind in English, Charles Jonáš’ _Bohemian Made Easy_ being really
an interpreter and not a scientific grammar. The Bohemian Literary Society
of Chicago, it is reported, has in preparation a new English grammar for
the study of the Čech language.

In Count Lützow’s _History of Bohemian Literature_, the student will find
an excellent manual. With his usual painstaking care, the author recounts
in a lucid manner the story of Bohemian literature, its glory and its
vicissitudes.

MISCELLANY. Attention is called to a meritorious volume under this
subtitle, by de Moleville, _The Costumes of the Hereditary (!) States of
the House of Austria_. Fifteen plates portray old Bohemian, Slovak and
Moravian costumes.

[Illustration: The Kralice Bible

Though not the oldest in point of date, the Kralice Bible (1st ed.
  1579-93, 6 vs.) is the most renowned of all the Bohemian Bibles. Formerly
  in the Lenox collection, it is now the property, with other rare Bohemian
  Bibles, of the New York City Public Library]

MUSIC. Critics rate Bedřich Smetana (1824-1884) as the greatest Bohemian
composer, yet it is Dr. Antonín Dvořák (1841-1904) who is the most widely
known outside of his native country. The reason for this is that Dvořák
visited England and spent a number of years in New York as director of a
conservatory of music. “The forcefulness and freshness of Dvořák’s music,”
writes H. E. Krehbiel, the noted New York musical critic, “come primarily
from his use of dialects and idioms derived from the folk-music of the
Chekhs.... Dvořák is not a nationalist in the Lisztian sense; he borrows
not melodies but the characteristic elements from the folk-songs of his
people.”

Smetana’s renown was won on precisely the same ground which made Dvořák
famous, the only difference being that Smetana applied the principle of
the folk-song before Dvořák. Previous to Smetana’s time one could speak of
music in Bohemia, but not of Bohemian music. George Benda (1721-1795),
Joseph Mysliveček (1737-1781), John Ladislav Dusík (1761-1812--the name
of this “neglected composer” is also spelled Dussek), Václav John Tomášek
or Tomaschek (1774-1850), author of the usual method of fingering double
scales, were writers of music who belonged to the period when there was
music in Bohemia, when composers were content to imitate Beethoven, Bach,
Mozart and Wagner; when they strove to out-German the Germans in music.
Smetana was the first to strike the true chord of inspiration--the chord
touching the nation’s soul--the folk-song. It was the influence of the
folk-song which lent to his masterpiece, the _Bartered Bride_, (Prodaná
Nevěsta) its exquisite charm and enduring freshness. Apropos, the Bartered
Bride was introduced to the American public at the New York Metropolitan
Opera House on April 29, 1909, and the baton on this unforgettable
occasion was wielded by Gustav Mahler, also a native of Bohemia, though
not a Čech.

Of the several musical artists who have visited the United States, none
have won larger recognition from the critics and the public than Jan
Kubelík (born 1880), violinist, Emmy Destinn (born 1878), soprano.

PERIODICALS. The long cherished wish that there might be an English
language newspaper which should interpret to the Americans the ideals of
the Bohemian race was realized in September, 1892, when _The Bohemian
Voice_, a monthly printed in Omaha and published by the National
Committee, was issued. Through lack of funds _The Bohemian Voice_ was
forced to suspend publication in November, 1894. The first editor of this
“organ of the Bohemian-Americans in the United States” was Thomas Čapek;
upon his resignation, in April, 1894, J. J. Král took charge as editor.

The speculative _American Bi-Monthly_, launched in Chicago in 1914, failed
after publishing two numbers.

In February, 1917, the Bohemian National Alliance in America started a
monthly in Chicago, _The Bohemian Review_. In the initial number the
editor, Dr. J. F. Smetanka, argues as follows: “If some two hundred
thousand people[10] can support more than eighty publications in the
Bohemian language, why should not three hundred thousand of their
children, more used to the English language, establish and support just
one organ devoted to their interests as Americans of Czech descent?”

  [10] The 1910 U. S. census has found in the country 539,392 people of
  Bohemian stock, of whom 228,738 were foreign born, 310,654 native born.

In conclusion it may be added, that _The New Europe_, of London, though
by no means a Bohemian or a Slavic magazine, has paid generous attention
to Bohemian questions as affected by the war. Among the collaborators of
_The New Europe_ are such able students of Austrian politics as Thomas G.
Masaryk, late Professor at the Bohemian University of Prague, Dr. R. W.
Seton-Watson of King’s College and H. Wickham Steed of the London _Times_.

PLANS, MAPS. ETC. Of especial interest to the students of American
Colonial history is the _Map of Virginia and Maryland this present
Year 1670 Surveyed and Exactly Drawne by the Only Labour and Endeavour
of Augustin Herrman, Bohemiensis_. A copy of this rare map is on file
in the Library of Congress in Washington.[11] In addition to the Map of
Maryland, Herrman made a sketch of New Amsterdam (New York) as that city
looked in 1650. Herrman is reputed to be the first Bohemian immigrant to
America, coming here in 1633. On the site of the former Bohemia Manor
in Cecil County, Maryland, there is still preserved a tombstone bearing
this inscription: “Avgvstine Herrmen Bohemian The First Fovnder Seater of
Bohemea Manner Anno 1661.” Like Wenceslaus Hollar, John Amos Komenský,
Paul Skála ze Zhoře, (the historian) and thousands of other Protestants,
Herrman, the son of a minister of the gospel, was forced to flee from
Bohemia after the overthrow of the Protestants there.

  [11] For Augustine Herrman’s life see _Památky Českých Emigrantů v
  Americe_ (Data on Bohemian Immigration to America), by Thomas Čapek,
  Omaha, 1907. J. V. Nigrin described Herrman’s map in the Chicago
  _Svornost_, August 2-9, 1914.

POLITICS AND WAR PUBLICATIONS. Publication has received an unwonted
impetus from the war. Never since the Thirty Years’ War have the
grievances and political aspirations of the Bohemians been given more
widespread publicity. Woodrow Wilson stated the situation precisely in one
of his books when he declared that “no lapse of time, no defeat of hopes,
seems sufficient to reconcile the Czechs of Bohemia to incorporation with
Austria.” Since 1848, the year which saw the dawn of constitutionalism
in the Hapsburg monarchy, the Bohemians have been asking for home rule;
the lessons of war at once suggested a bolder program, a new orientation.
Presently their leaders demand a separation from Austria and the inclusion
in an independent Bohemian State of the Slovaks of Hungary. Under this
subtitle the reader will find indexed articles by opponents (Heilprin)
as well as by well-wishers. Of the new orientation, that is, of a
Bohemian-Slovak State, free and independent, the leading intellect outside
of Bohemia is Professor Masaryk, temporarily an exile in England.

Thomas Garrigue Masaryk (the middle name is assumed from that of his
American wife, Miss Charlotte Garrigue of New York) is writing his name
large in what posterity will joyfully call Bohemian Emancipation. Masaryk
was born of humble Moravian-Slovak parentage in 1850. From the time he
entered public life, he was always a rebel, though in the finest sense of
the term; rebel in politics, rebel in literature, rebel in the manner he
interpreted Bohemian nationalism. That he was not summarily removed from
the chair he occupied in the Prague University was due to fear of the man,
to fear of his large following, and not to the want of powerful accusers
or because of scruples on the part of the government. In native literature
and politics alike, Masaryk’s activities are bound to leave a deep mark.
Fortunately for the cause, he was able to effect his escape from Austria
in the early stages of the war.

An able writer and a forceful advocate of Bohemia’s cause in the United
States is Charles Pergler, vice-president of the Bohemian National
Alliance in America.

PRAGUE. Von Humboldt was not the only traveler who thought that the
capital of the Bohemian Kingdom was the most beautiful inland town of all
Europe. American and English tourists who have visited the city all concur
in the opinion of von Humboldt. “Prague to a Bohemian,” to quote Arthur
Symons (_Harper’s Magazine_, Sept., 1901), “is the epitome of the history
of his country; he sees it as the man sees the woman he loves, with her
first beauty.” Lützow’s _Story of Prague_ will fully repay the reader who
would like to know more of this beautiful mediæval city.

SOCIOLOGY AND ECONOMICS. The theme of Slavic immigration to America within
the last twenty-five years has been considered by politicians, settlement
workers, immigration “specialists,” professional labor agitators and
others. The caption of Alois B. Koukol’s article in _The Charities and
Commons, A Slav’s a Man for A’ That_, sums up the situation precisely.
Yes, the American Slav is a man, for all that has been said about
him--chiefly against him--by professional labor agitators; but it took the
Great War to demonstrate his utility to America. No economist has written
of him with greater sympathy, understanding and tact than Emily Greene
Balch, teacher at Wellesley College. To get a more accurate perspective on
the subject, Miss Balch went to the source, to their homelands to observe
_Our Slavic Fellow Citizens_.

SOKOLS. The “Sokol Union” (Sokol in Bohemian means falcon, a bird typical
of strength and fearlessness) is, or rather was, until the Great War,
the most powerful non-political organization in Bohemia. Suspecting its
members of disloyalty, the authorities in the first stages of the war,
dissolved it. Miroslav Tyrš and Henry Fügner founded the “Sokol Union” in
1862. Body culture is the primary though not the sole aim of the society;
considered from its ethical aspect the “Sokol Union” contemplates nothing
less than the moral and physical regeneration of the Bohemian race.
From Bohemia the Sokol idea has gradually found its way into other Slav
countries, Poland, Russia, Serbia, Bulgaria and there are Sokols, men and
women, even in America.

TRAVEL AND DESCRIPTION. The old time travelers like Christian Frederick
Damberger, Georg Robert Gleig, Johann Georg Keysler, Johann Georg Kohl,
described not the kingdom of the Čechs, but Bohemia, the Province of
Austria. After 1621 Bohemia ceased to exist as an independent state and
the veneer of Teutonism thickened from year to year. So complete seemed
the denationalization of Bohemia in the eighteenth century and even in
the first part of the nineteenth, that foreigners visiting the baths at
Carlsbad and Marienbad were surprised to hear peasants talk in an unknown
tongue. As for the real Bohemia, after she had again found herself, no
English or American traveler has more trenchantly described her castles,
her mediæval churches, her splendid ruins, her roads, her industries, her
schools, than James Baker.

Two books by travelers of Bohemian nationality might be mentioned,
though, strictly speaking, they have no place in our Bohemica. They are
Dr. Emil Holub’s _Seven Years in South Africa; travels, researches, and
hunting adventures between the diamond fields and the Zambesi_, 1872-79,
translated by Ellen Frewer and published in London by Low, Marston, Searle
& Rivington in 1881. The other is B. Kroupa’s _An Artist’s Tour; gleanings
and impressions of travels in North and Central America and the Sandwich
Islands_. With illustrations by the author. Published by Ward & Downey,
London, in 1890.

The opinion has been expressed that John Lederer, the Virginia traveler,
was not an Austrian, as some surmise, but a Bohemian.[12] Lederer is by
no means an uncommon surname among Bohemians; moreover, there is evidence
that Bohemian exiles began settling in Virginia during the Thirty Years’
War.

  [12] _The Discoveries of John Lederer, in three several marches from
  Virginia to the west of Carolina, and other parts of the Continent_:
  Begun in March, 1669, and ended in September, 1670. Together with a
  General Map of the whole territory which he traversed. Collected and
  translated out of Latine from his Discourse and Writings by Sir William
  Talbot, Baronet. London. Printed by J. C. for Samuel Heyrick, at Grays
  Inne-Gate in Holborn. 1672.




II

ART


PUBLICATIONS

Berlin Photographic Company. Catalogue of an exhibition of contemporary
    graphic art in Hungary, Bohemia and Austria, December 6-27, 1913.
    Introductory by Martin Birnbaum. Portraits. Plates. 50 pp. New
    York. 1913.

Brožík, Václav. Catalogue of the studies, sketches, paintings,
    antiques, tapestries of ---- fully described with sketch of his
    life. 60 pp. Exhibited at John Wanamaker Art Gallery. New York.
    1902.

Holárek, Emile. War. Pictures by ---- with readings in the subject from
    the writings of Leo Tolstoy and others. Edited by V. Tchertkoff.
    Christchurch. Free Age Press. 4º 17 l. New York.

Hollar, Wenceslaus. The foremost reference book is George Vertue’s,
    Description of the Works of the Ingenious Delineator and Engraver
    Wenceslaus Hollar, disposed into Classes of Different Sorts; with
    some account of His Life. Printed in London, for the editor G. V. A
    Member of the Society of Antiquaries. 1745. Lists over 1000 works.
    Included therein is: A small view of Prague, Another small view of
    Prague from St. Lorentzberg to Schloss, Two Coins in Honour of the
    Garter, upon the Investiture of Frederick, King of Bohemia, View of
    Prague, Another View of Prague by the River Molda, A large Prospect
    of Prague, in three plates, drawn in 1636 and done at Antwerp.
    With F. Place, Hollar drew among others: An exact Map of America,
    A Map of Hungary, A Map of Africa, A Map of England. Under Various
    Habits of Nations is found, Mulier Pragensis, Civis Pragensis
    Filia, Mercatoris Pragensis Uxor, Mulier Bohemica bonæ qualitatis,
    Nobilis Mulier Bohemica, Rustica Bohemica, Two different heads of
    Hollar’s wife. The Guide to the Drawings and Prints exhibited to
    the Public in King’s Library, British Museum, enumerates nearly two
    hundred portraits of eminent personages of the time, views, etc. A
    valuable reference is: A catalogue of a collection of Prints, the
    work of ----, the property of a distinguished collector. Added,
    a small collection of portraits of distinguished artists; also
    some choicer productions of Morglen, Hogarth, Wille, etc. Sold by
    auction, by Mr. Sotheby, 16th July, 1827. 8º. 28 pp. Davy. London.
    1827. Of the more noted subjects mention is made of: Solemn League
    and Covenant, for reformation and defence of religion, the honour
    and happinesse of the King and the peace and safety of the three
    Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland. 1643. The Holy Bible,
    etc. With large engravings chiefly by ----, 1659. fo. The Fables
    of Æsop paraphrased in verse, by J. Ogilby. The frontispiece and
    the engravings to Æsop. Pt. 1, fables 1, 2, 4, 5, 7-19, etc.;
    pt. 2, fables 1-13, etc., and to the Ephesian Matron, being by
    ----, 1665. fo. Exact surveigh of the streets, lanes and churches
    contained within the ruines of the city of London. 1667. London
    Topographical Society. London. 1908. Dance of Death, painted by
    J. Holbein, and engraved by ----. The Dance of Machabree, wherein
    is lively expressed ... the state of manne.... Made by Dan John
    Lydgate, Monke of S. Edmunds Bury. The whole edited, with preface
    and description of the plates, etc., by F. Douce. London. 1794. 8º.
    33 plates, including the portrait of Hollar and that of Holbein.

Holme, Charles, editor. Peasant Art in Austria and Hungary.
    Introduction by A. S. Levetus; Peasant Art by M. Haberlandt.
    Bohemia-Egerland, plates Nos. 226-300; Moravia, 301-360; Silesia,
    363-373. Illustrated. The Studio. London. Paris. New York. 1911.

Lehner, Ferdinand. Česká Škola Malířská XI. věku. The Bohemian School
    of Painting of the XI. Century. Bohemian text; preface translated
    into English by Jane Mourek. Illustrated. Reprodukcí a tiskem České
    Grafické Společnosti Unie. Prague.

Lessing, Karl Friedrich. Notices in English of his painting: The
    Martyrdom of Huss. From a catalogue of the Düsseldorf Gallery.

Mucha, Alphonse Marie, in Posters by Charles Matlack Price.
    Illustrated. George W. Bricka. New York, 1913.

[Illustration:

                                NEWES
                             From Bohemia.

                             _An Apologie_

               Made by the States of the Kingdome of Bohemia,
                   shewing the Reasons why those of the
                   Reformed Religion were moued to take
                    Armes, for the defence of the King
                       and themselues, _especially
                          against the dangerous
                            Sect of Iesuites_.

                                 WITH

             A plaine Declaration, that those who belong vnto
              the Monasteries and Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction
               (according vnto his Maiesties Letters, and
                 Agreements made betweene the States of
                  the Reformed Religion and the Papists)
                   haue good right, as being Subiects
                     of the Imperiall Maiestie, to
                       _the peaceable exercise of
                        their Diuine Seruice, and
                          building of Churches_.

                Translated out of Dutch into Latine, and
                _thence into English_, _by_ Will. Philip.


                                _LONDON_,
       Printed by _George Purslow_ for _Ralph Rounthwaite_, and are
              to bee sold at his Shop, at the Signe of the
                  Flower de luce and Crowne, in _Pauls_
                            Church-yard. 1619.

News from Bohemia

Recital of reasons why the Protestants resorted to arms to protect
themselves]

Náprstek’s Bohemian Industrial Museum ---- from ----. Our Mothers’
    Work. A Selection of Bohemian National Embroidery. fo. 25 plates.
    33 pp. English and French preface, signed Jan Koula. Prague. 1898.

Šíma, Joseph. Selections of native designs of embroidered work from
    Bohemia, Moravia and northeastern Hungary. fo. 30 colored plates
    and 19 illustrations. A. Píša. Brno, Moravia. 1909.

Vojan, J. E. S. Some Thoughts on the Graphic Arts. Introductory to, A
    Portfolio of Prints. Etchings by Rudolph Růžička, etc. The Graphic
    Arts Club. New York. 1908.

Vondrous, J. C. The Etchings of ----, by William B. M’Cormick.
    Exhibited in the gallery of Arthur H. Hahlo & Co. Illustrated. 27
    pp. New York. 1917.


ARTICLES

Connolly, Louise. What Shall “Made in America” Stand For? The Woman
    Citizen. New York. 2:210-11. Feb. 9, 1918.

Czecho-Slovak Exhibition of Art, in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New
    York. The New York Times Magazine Section. Dec. 23, 1917.

Fred, W. Two Bohemian Painters: F. Jennewein and E. Holárek.
    Illustrated. Artist. New York. 32:196-200. 1902.

Korbel, Mario. The Work of ----. The International Studio. New York.
    57:XIX. Nov., 1915.

---- Memorial Sculpture in Denver by ----. Illustrated. The International
    Studio. New York. 59:LXI. Sept., 1916.

---- Sculptures by ----. Town and Country. New York. 71:27. Nov. 1,
    1916.

---- American Art News. New York. 15:1. Nov. 11, 1916.

---- by C. Owen Lublin. Illustrated. Town and Country. New York. 71:26.
    Mar. 10, 1917.

---- Three plates from an exhibition of sculpture by ----. The New
    Country Life. New York. 32:53-5. June, 1917.

---- A Portrait Bust: The Art World. New York. 3:135. Nov., 1917.

Kratina, Joseph. Exhibit of the Work of ----. Illustrated. The
    International Studio. New York. 58:61-3. Apr., 1916.

Levetus, A. S. Austrian Peasant Embroidery. The International Studio.
    New York. 29:111-18; same, The Personal Ornaments of the Austrian
    Peasant. 29:332-38. 1906.

McCabe, Lida Rose. Peasant Art in New York’s Bohemia. Joseph Mrazek’s
    Peasant Art. The Art World. New York. 3:356-58. Jan., 1918.

Moravian Slovakei Art. A. S. L. Illustrated. The International Studio.
    New York. 50:150-55. Aug., 1913.

Mucha, Alphonse M. and the New Mysticism. By Christian Brinton.
    Illustrated. Century. New York. 69:216-25. Dec., 1904.

Polasek, Albin. The Exhibition of the works of ----, by Agnes Gertrude
    Richards. Fine Arts Journal. Chicago. 35:122-26. Feb., 1917.

Prinsep, V. C. Bohemia: New Country for the Artist. Illustrated.
    Magazine of Art. New York. 28:125-28. Jan., 1904.

Ruzicka, Rudolph. An Appreciation of ----, by D. B. Updike.
    Illustrated. The Printing Art. Cambridge. 30:17-24. Sept., 1917.

---- Wood Engraver. By S. H. Horgan. The Inland Printer. Chicago.
    59:617. 1917.

Schanzer, Hedwig. Teaching of Design at the Prague Arts and Crafts
    School. Illustrated. The International Studio. New York. 45:277-86.
    Feb., 1912.

Tyrš, Renata. Bohemian Needlework and Costumes. The Bohemian Review.
    Chicago. 2:5-8. Jan., 1918.

Vojan, J. E. S. Indians in Bohemian Art. Daily News. Chicago. Dec. 14,
    1912.

---- Story of Bohemian Graphic Art. The Sunday Republican. Cedar
    Rapids. Mar. 30, 1913.

---- Fine Arts in Bohemia. The Bohemian Review. Chicago. 1:8-10. Oct.;
    1:6-8. Nov.; 1:5-7. Dec., 1917; 2:23-7. Feb., 1918.




III

BIBLIOGRAPHY


PUBLICATIONS AND ARTICLES

Balch, Emily Greene. Bibliography. Pp. 483-512. Our Slavic Fellow
    Citizens. Charities Publication Committee. New York. 1910.

Bibliography. Division of ----. Library of Congress. Supplementary to
    list of books on immigration, 1907. List of references on Slavs in
    America. Select list 52. Typewritten. Washington. 1915.

Firkins, Ina Ten Eyck. Slavs in the United States. A reading list
    compiled by ----. Bulletin of Bibliography. Boston. 8:217-21. Oct.,
    1915.

Hrbek, Jeffrey D. List of books in English relating to Bohemians and
    Bohemia. Osvěta Americká. Omaha. Dec. 30, 1908.

Kerner, R. J. Foundations of Slavic Bibliography. Reprinted from
    the Papers of the Bibliographical Society of America. 10:3-39.
    Jan., 1916. Published for the Bibliographical Society of America.
    Chicago. 1916.

---- Slavic Europe. A Selected Bibliography in the Western European
    Languages comprising history, languages and literatures. 500 pp.
    Harvard University Press. Cambridge. 1918.

Malin, Wm. Gunn. Catalogue of books relating to, or illustrating the
    history of the Unitas Fratrum, or United Brethren, as established
    in Bohemia and Moravia by followers of John Huss, overthrown and
    exiled by Ferdinand II, of Austria, renewed and reorganized under
    the auspices of Count Zinzendorf, and now generally known as the
    Moravian Church. Pp. 1-131. Includes Bohemian, English, Latin,
    German, Dutch and French books collected by Wm. Gunn Malin, member
    of the Church. The Malin Library, so-called, numbers (1881) 690
    works and is the property of the Moravian Church at Bethlehem, Pa.
    Philadelphia. 1881.

Rosenthal, Herman. A List of Russian, other Slavonic and Baltic
    periodicals in the New York Public Library. 36 pp. Bohemian
    periodicals pp. 30-31. New York Public Library. 1916.

Sum, A. Bohemica. List of books in English. Prague. 1913.

Wharton, Leonard Cyril. English books on Bohemia, including
    translations. Pp. 145-48. Guide to the Bohemian Section and the
    Kingdom of Bohemia. Prague. 1906.

Yarros, Gregory. The Slav Peoples. A study outline. Tentative edition.
    23 pp. The H. W. Wilson Co. White Plains and New York. 1915.




IV

BIOGRAPHY AND PORTRAITS


PUBLICATIONS AND ARTICLES

Augusta, John. Portrait: De Schweinitz’s The Unitas Fratrum.

Biographical Dictionary of the World’s Best Literature. Lives of
    numerous Bohemian writers. Charles Dudley Warner, editor. J. A.
    Hill & Co. New York. 1896.

Brožík, Václav. Portrait and biographical note: The Bohemian Voice.
    Dec., 1892; Biography: Art. New York. 47:130. 1895; Portrait:
    Monroe’s Bohemia and the Čechs.

Budovec, Václav of Budova. Portrait: De Schweinitz’s The Unitas Fratrum.

Čech, Svatopluk. Portrait and biographical note: The Bohemian Voice.
    Nov., 1893; Portrait: Monroe’s Bohemia and the Čechs.

Destinn, Emmy. Portrait: Illustrated London News. April 30, 1904. See
    Music.

Dignowity, Anthony M. Autobiography: Bohemia under Austrian Despotism.
    12º. 236 pp. By the author. New York. 1859.

Dobrovský, Josef. Portrait: Vicker’s History of Bohemia.

Dussek (Dusík) Jan Ladislav. Biography: Baker’s Biog. Dict. of Music.,
    160; Paine’s Famous Composers, 2:588.

Dvořák, Antonín. Portrait and biographical note: The Bohemian Voice.
    Nov., 1892; Portrait: Baker’s Biog. Dict. of Music., 161; Century,
    22:642. 1892; Critic, 30:241. 1897; Elson’s Modern Composers of
    Europe; Hadow’s Studies in Mod. Music, 2:190; Harper’s Magazine,
    90:428. 1895; Harper’s Weekly, 38:441. 1894; Outlook, 71:650. 1902;
    Paine’s Famous Composers, 2:50; Review of Reviews, 29:750; Monroe’s
    Bohemia and the Čechs. See Music.

Fibich, Zděnek. Portrait: Monroe’s Bohemia and the Čechs.

Grégr, Edward. Portrait and biographical note: The Bohemian Voice.
    April, 1893.

Havlíček, Karel. Biography: J. E. S. Vojan in Memorial (English and
    Bohemian), issued by the Publication Committee of the Association
    for the erection of a monument to Karel Havlíček in Chicago, July
    30, 1911; Portrait and biographical note: The Bohemian Voice. July,
    1893; Portrait: Vicker’s History of Bohemia; Gregor’s Story of
    Bohemia; Biography: J. E. S. Vojan in the English Section of Orgán
    Bratrstva Č. S. P. S. 24:258. 1916.

Herrman, Augustine. Portrait and biography: New Amsterdam and its
    People. J. H. Innes.

Hollar, Wenceslaus. Portrait and biography: Douce’s edition, 1794, of
    Dance of Death; portrait and biography: Vertue’s Description of the
    Works of ----.

Hrbek, Jeffrey D. Biographical Sketch in his Linden Blossoms. Poems.
    With foreword by C. F. Ansley. 8º. 126 pp. The Torch Press. Cedar
    Rapids. 1908.

Hus, John. Portrait and biography: Hume’s Portraits of Leading
    Reformers. 1851; Illustrated London News, 119:821. 1901; Maurice’s
    Story of Bohemia; Rolt’s Lives of the Principal Reformers, 12-22.
    1759; De Schweinitz’s The Unitas Fratrum; Vicker’s History of
    Bohemia; Gregor’s Story of Bohemia; The Bohemian Voice. July, 1894;
    Review of Reviews, 43:620-21. 1911; Portraits are very numerous.
    The only monument in the United States to Hus stands in Bohemia
    Village, Long Island. Description and picture in the Bohemian
    Voice. Oct., 1893.

Janauschek, Frances. Portrait: McClure’s Magazine. Sept., 1894. See
    Drama.

Jerome of Prague. Portrait: Hume’s Portraits of Leading Reformers.
    1851; Rolt’s Lives of Reformers. 1759.

Jirásek, Alois. Portrait: Monroe’s Bohemia and the Čechs.

Jonáš, Charles. Portrait and biographical note: The Bohemian Voice.
    Mar. 1894.

Jungmann, Josef. Portrait: Vicker’s History of Bohemia.

Kollár, Jan. Portrait and biographical note: The Bohemian Voice.
    Aug., 1893; Vicker’s History of Bohemia; Gregor’s Story of
    Bohemia. Biography: Louis Leger’s article Le Poète du Panslavisme,
    translated for the Bohemian Voice. June to Sept., 1894; The Life of
    ----, a biography. 32 pp. English version by John Kulamer, Slovak
    version by Peter S. Kompiš. Slovak League of America. Pittsburgh.
    1917.

Komenský, John Amos. Portrait and biographical note: The Bohemian
    Voice. Oct., 1892; Harper’s Weekly, 36:326. 1892; Maurice’s Story
    of Bohemia; De Schweinitz’s The Unitas Fratrum; Vicker’s History of
    Bohemia; Review of Reviews, 43:620-21. 1911.

Kubelík, Jan. Portraits: Century, 41:745. 1902; Critic, 40:6. 1902;
    Harper’s Weekly, 45:1131. 1901; same, 46:1. 1902; Illustrated
    London News, 119:771. 1901; Vanity Fair Album, 35:877. 1903.

Kvapil, Jaroslav. Biography: Šárka B. Hrbkova, Poet Lore, 27:76-80.
    1916.

Lützow, Count Francis. Biography: J. E. S. Vojan, English section of
    Orgán Bratrstva Č. S. P. S. 24:55. 1916.

Masaryk, Thomas G. Biography; J. E. S. Vojan, English section of
    Orgán Bratrstva Č. S. P. S. 23:260. 1915; same, and portrait, The
    Bohemian Review, 1:3-7. 1917.

Mucha, Alphonse M. Portrait: Lamp, 28:330. 1904.

Náprstek, Vojta. Biography: Clara Vostrovský, The Sequoia, Palo Alto,
    Cal., Mar. 8, 1895; Portrait and biography: The Bohemian Voice,
    Sept., 1893; same, Oct. and Nov., 1894; Portrait: Monroe’s Bohemia
    and the Čechs.

Němcová, Božena. Portrait and biographical note: The Bohemian Voice,
    May, 1893; Biography: Frances Gregor’s Grandmother.

Neruda, Jan. Portrait and biographical note: The Bohemian Voice. June,
    1893.

Ondříček, František. Portrait and biographical note: The Bohemian
    Voice. Oct., 1893.

Palacký, František. Portrait: Vicker’s History of Bohemia; Gregor’s
    Story of Bohemia.

Rieger, František L. Portrait and biographical note: The Bohemian
    Voice. Jan., 1893.

Rokycana, Jan. Portrait: De Schweinitz’s The Unitas Fratrum.

Šafařík, Paul Josef. Portrait: Vicker’s History of Bohemia.

Sládek, Josef Václav. Portrait: Jacks’ Robert Burns in other tongues,
    254. 1896.

Smetana, Bedřich. Portrait and biographical note: The Bohemian Voice.
    Feb., 1893; Baker’s Biog. Dict. of Music., 549. 1900; Elson’s
    Modern Composers of Europe; Portraits: Monroe’s Bohemia and the
    Čechs; Review of Reviews. May, 1911; by Max Švabinský in, Bohemia,
    published by The Bohemian National Alliance in America. See Music.

Světlá, Karolina. Portrait and biographical note: The Bohemian Voice.
    Mar., 1894.

Tyrš, Miroslav. Portrait and biography: Introduction to the foundations
    of gymnastics. See Sokols.

Vrchlický, Jaroslav. Portrait and biographical note: The Bohemian
    Voice. June, 1894; Biography by Charles Recht. Poet Lore.
    24:309-11. 1913. Portrait: Monroe’s Bohemia and the Čechs.

Žerotín, Lord Karel. Portrait: De Schweinitz’s The Unitas Fratrum.

Žižka, Jan. Portrait of monument: The Bohemian Voice. Feb., 1894;
    Portrait: Review of Reviews, 43:620-21. 1911.

[Illustration:


                             THE REASONS
                                which
            compelled the States of _Bohemia_ to reiect the
                 Archiduke Ferdinand &c. & inforced
                        them to elect a new
                                King.

                              Togeather.

                        VVITH THE PROPOSITION
              which was made vppon the first motion of the
               chocie of th’ _Elector Palatine_ to be King
                  of _Bohemia_, by the States of that
                  Kingdome in their publique assembly
                   on the 16.th of August, being the
                        birth day of the same
                          _Elector Palatine_.

                Translated out of the french copies.


                              at. Dort.
                             Printet by.

                                        George Waters.

The Reasons

Which compelled the Bohemian Estates to reject Ferdinand of Austria and
choose Frederick of the Palatinate as their King]




V

BOHEMIAN GLASS


PUBLICATIONS

Dillon, Edward. Glass. 4º. 374 pp. Bohemian Glass, pp. 242-93. G. P.
    Putnam’s Sons. New York. 1907.

Sauzay, A. Wonders of Glass Making in all Ages. 63 engravings. Bohemia,
    pp. 49-55; 146-47. Scribner, Armstrong & Co. New York. 1872.


ARTICLES

Baker, James. The Glass Trade of Bohemia. Chamber’s Journal. London.
    Oct., 1903.

Bohemian Glass. Illustrated. National Magazine. New York. 3:489-94.
    Dec., 1853.

Dyer, W. A. Bohemian Glassware. Illustrated. Country Life. New York.
    13:401-3. Feb., 1908.

Powell, H. J. Glass-Blowing in Bohemia. Magazine of Art. New York.
    28:421-23. July, 1904.

Schwartz, H. Bohemian Glass. Popular Science Monthly. New York.
    29:346-52. 1886.




VI

DICTIONARIES. GRAMMARS. INTERPRETERS


PUBLICATIONS

Eliášová, B. M. (Cvičebnice anglického jazyka pro školy.) Text Book of
    the English Language for Schools. 250 pp. Bursík & Kohout. Prague.
    1909.

Fejfar, F. (Anglická fraseologie obchodní.) Business Phraseology in
    English. Prague. 1904.

Francl, F. (Učebnice jazyka anglického pro samouky.) Text Book of the
    English Language for Self-tuition. 248 pp. Bohemian Publishing and
    Importing Co. New York. 1912-13.

Jonáš, Charles. (Česko-anglický Tlumač.) Bohemian English Interpreter.
    Teaching English to the Bohemian Immigrant in America. Two parts.
    Racine. 1865. Enlarged in 1884 under the title New American
    Interpreter (Nový Tlumač Americký). 16th edition in 1915.

---- (Slovník česko-anglický i anglicko-český s doplňky.) A complete
    Pronouncing Dictionary of the English and Bohemian Languages, for
    general use. Two parts: Bohemian-English and English-Bohemian.
    1176 pp. Slavie. Racine. 1876. Numerous editions since.

---- Bohemian Made Easy. A practical Bohemian course for English
    speaking people. 294 pp. Racine. 1890.

Jung, V. A. Unabridged Dictionary of the English and Bohemian
    Languages. 8º. 1576 pp. J. Otto. Prague. 1911.

Krupička, František. (Učebnice jazyka anglického pro obchodní
    akademie.) Text Book of the English Language for the use of
    business schools. Society for the support of the Bohemian Slavic
    Business Academy in Prague. Three parts. 442 pp. 1907.

Morfill, R. W. A Grammar of the Bohemian or Čech Language. 8º. 170 pp.
    Clarendon Press. Oxford. 1899.

Mourek, V. E. (Slovník jazyka anglického i českého.) A Dictionary of
    the English and Bohemian Languages. Two parts: English-Bohemian and
    Bohemian-English. I. L. Kober. Prague. 1879. Second edition, Otto
    Holtze’s Nachfolger. Leipsic. 1912.

---- (Učebné listy jazyka anglického pro samouky.) Lessons in English
    for Self-tuition. Two parts. 748 pp. F. A. Urbánek. Prague. 1889.

Nigrin, Jaroslav Victor. Bohemian Grammar. (Bohemian Made Easy.) 200
    pp. Slavie Publishing Company, Chicago. 1918.

Pacák, L. English for Emigrants. 119 pp. Prague. 1912.

Shearer, James William. A combination method of instruction for
    quickly teaching English pronounciation to foreigners. Bohemian.
    144 pp. William R. Jenkins Company. New York. 1914.

Sládek, J. V. (Anglická čítanka se slovníčkem.) English Reader and
    Pocket Dictionary in one. Prague. 1875.

---- (Průpravná mluvnice anglického jazyka.) Preparatory Grammar of the
    English Language. 294 pp. F. Řivnáč. Prague.

Soukup, Anthony M. (Praktická škola anglického jazyka.) Practical
    School of the English Language. 366 pp. By the author. Chicago.
    1895.

---- (Znalec angličiny.) Teacher of English. New English Grammar. 250
    pp. By the author. Chicago. 1899.

---- (Čtenář novin anglických.) English Newspaper Reader. 240 pp. By
    the author. Chicago. 1900.

---- (Nový velký anglicko-český slovník.) New Unabridged
    English-Bohemian Dictionary. 360 pp. By the author. Chicago. 1900.

---- (Samouk česko-anglický.) English Self-Taught. 144 pp. By the
    author. Chicago. 1906.

Straka, Adolf W. English Grammar. Prague. 1862.

Váňa, Jan. (Stručná anglická mluvnice.) Brief English Grammar and
    Reader. Prefaced by, How to Pronounce. For the use of schools and
    self-instruction. 160 pp. 3rd revised edition. Prague. 1911.

---- Pocket Dictionary of the English-Bohemian and Bohemian-English
    Languages. Two parts. 16º. 474 pp. Jindřich Lorenz. Třebíč.
    Moravia. 1907.

Vymazal, F. (Anglicky snadno a rychle.) Easy Method for Learning
    English Quickly. 70 pp. F. Bačkovský. Prague. 1902.

Zdrůbek, F. B. (Anglická mluvnice.) English Grammar, or a new proved
    method to learn to read, write and speak English in three months.
    206 pp. Cedar Rapids. 1870.

---- (Nová anglická mluvnice.) New English Grammar. Do you speak
    English? Čeněk Duras. Omaha. 1874; same, amplified, two parts. 272
    pp. August Geringer. Chicago. 1874.

---- (Čítanka první s obrázky.) Illustrated First Reader for the use of
    American-Bohemian Schools. 116 pp. August Geringer. Chicago. 1875.

---- (Anglický vyslovovatel.) English Pronouncer, for the use of
    American-Bohemian Schools and Self-instruction. 215 pp. August
    Geringer. Chicago. 1883.

---- (Kapesní slovník anglické a české řeči.) A Pocket Dictionary
    of the Bohemian and English Languages, with full pronunciation
    and accentuation. Part 1, English and Bohemian, 288 pp. Part 2,
    Bohemian and English, 390 pp. August Geringer. Chicago. 1886.

---- (Českoanglický Tlumač.) Bohemian and English Interpreter. 258 pp.
    August Geringer. Chicago. 1898.

Zmrhal, Jaroslav J. (Anglicky snadno ve třiceti úlohách.) Easy Method
    for Learning English in Thirty Lessons. 112 pp. August Geringer.
    Chicago. 1913.




VII

DRAMA


ARTICLES

Hilbert, Jaroslav. Whom the Gods destroy. A one-act drama of the war of
    1866. Prefaced and translated by Charles Recht. Poet Lore. Boston.
    27:361-89. 1916.

Hrbkova, Šárka B. A Brief History of Modern Bohemian Drama. University
    (of Nebraska) Bulletin. Lincoln. July, 1914.

Janauschek, Francesca Romana Magdalena. Famous American Actors of
    today, by F. E. McKay. Janauschek, pp. 18-25. Portrait. 8º. T. Y.
    Crowell & Co. New York. 1896.

---- Passing of ----. Current Literature. New York. 33:395. Oct., 1902.

---- Estimate of ----. E. Fuller. Bookman. New York. 20:541-3. Feb.,
    1905.

---- Portraits of ----. McClure’s Magazine. New York. 3:346-47. 1894.

Kvapil, Jaroslav. The Will o’ the Wisp; a drama in four acts.
    Translated by Šárka B. Hrbkova. Poet Lore. Boston. 27:1-75. Jan.,
    1916.

---- Appreciation of ----, dramatist. By Šárka B. Hrbkova. Poet
    Lore. Boston. 27:76-80. Jan., 1916; same, Komenský, Organ of the
    Federation of Komenský Educational Clubs. Omaha. June, 1917.

---- The Clouds. A play in three acts. Translated by Charles Recht.
    Poet Lore. Boston. 21:417-66. Nov. and Dec., 1910.

Šubert, František Adolf. Jan Výrava; a drama in five acts. Translated
    by Šárka B. Hrbkova. Poet Lore. Boston. 26:281-350. 1915.

---- The Four Bare Walls; a drama in four acts. Translated by Beatrice
    M. Měkota and Francis Haffkine Snow. Poet Lore. Boston. 28:497-552.
    The Message of The Four Bare Walls, p. 553. Autumn. 1917.

Vrchlický, Jaroslav (Emil Frida). At the Chasm; one-act play for the
    library table. Translated by Charles Recht. Poet Lore. Boston.
    24:289-308. 1913.

---- By Charles Recht. Poet Lore. Boston. 24:309-11. 1913.

---- The Witness. Translated by Charles Recht. Poet Lore. Boston.
    25:546-58. 1914.

---- Vengeance of Catullus. Translated by Charles Recht. Poet Lore.
    Boston. 25:536-46. 1914.

---- and his place in Bohemian Drama. Charles Recht. Poet Lore. Boston.
    25:534-36. 1914.




VIII

FICTION


PUBLICATIONS

Alcock, Deborah. Crushed, yet Conquering: a Story of Constance and
    Bohemia. 576 pp. Fleming H. Revell Company. New York. 1892.

Baker, James. The Gleaming Dawn. A Romance of the Middle Ages. 8º. 391
    pp. Chapman and Hall. London. 1896.

---- The Cardinal’s Page. A Story of Historical Adventure. Bohemia in
    the fifteenth century. 8º. 314 pp. Chapman and Hall. London. 1899.

---- Mark Tillotson. 8º. 548 pp. Chapman and Hall. London.

Bertram, Paul. The Fifth Trumpet: A story of the last years of the
    Council at Constance. John Lane Co. London and New York. 1912.

Crawford, F. Marion. The Witch of Prague. A Fantastic Tale.
    Illustrated. 8º. 435 pp. The Macmillan Company. London. 1891.

Hay, Marie. The Winter Queen. Being the unhappy history of Elizabeth
    Stuart, Electress Palatine, Queen of Bohemia. A Romance. 8º. 432
    pp. Houghton Mifflin Company. New York and Boston. 1910.

Kopta, Flora P. The Forestman of Vimpek. A Bohemian Forest Village
    Story. 8º. 345 pp. Lathrop Publishing Company. Boston. 1900.

Kryshanovskaya, V. I. The Torch-Bearers of Bohemia. Translated from the
    Russian by Juliet M. Soskice. 302 pp. Chatto and Windus. London.
    1916.

Leslie, Emma. Before the Dawn. A Tale of Wicliffe and Bohemia.
    Illustrated. 240 pp. The Religious Tract Society. London. 1880.

Lucas, Annie. Wenzel’s Inheritance; or, Faithful unto Death. A Story of
    the Hussites. T. Nelson & Sons. London. 1880.

Morfill, R. W. The Last Days of John Hus. A Historical Romance.
    Anonymous. Translated from the original Čech and prefaced by
    ----. Illustrations by J. Dědina. 8º. 173 pp. The Religious Tract
    Society. London. 1909.

Mylechreest, Winifred B. The Fairest of the Stuarts (Queen Elizabeth of
    Bohemia). 8º. S. Low, Marston & Co. London. 1912.

Němcová, Božena. The Grandmother (Babička). A Story of Country Life in
    Bohemia. Translated with a biographical sketch of the authoress, by
    Frances Gregor. 8º. 352 pp. A. C. McClurg and Co. Chicago. 1892.

Paalzow, Henriette von. Thomas Thyrnau: The Citizen of Prague.
    Translated from the German by Mary Howitt. 12º. 3 vs. London. 1846.

Ramée, Louise de la (Ouida.) Strathmore; or, Wrought by His Own Hand.
    A Life Romance. 12º. 622 pp. J. B. Lippincott & Co. Philadelphia.
    1866.

Sand, George (Amantine Lucile Aurore Dupin Dudevant). Consuelo.
    Translated from the French by Francis G. Shaw. 12º. W. H. Graham.
    New York. 1848. Numerous translations.

---- The Countess of Rudolstadt. Sequel to Consuelo. Translated by
    Francis G. Shaw. 12º. W. D. Ticknor & Co. Boston. 1847. Numerous
    translations.

Šmilovský, Alois Vojtěch. Heavens (Nebesa). Translated from the Czech
    by V. E. and Jane Mourek. 8º. Bliss & Sands. London. 1894.

Světlá, Karolina. Maria Felicia, the Last Mistress of Hlohov. A Story
    of Bohemian Love. Translated by Antonie Krejsa. 278 pp. A. C.
    McClurg and Co. Chicago. 1900.

Vickers, Robert H. Zawis and Kunigunde, a Bohemian Tale. 307 pp. C. H.
    Kerr & Company. Chicago. 1895.

Winlow, Clara Vostrovský. Barbora: Our Little Bohemian Cousin.
    Illustrated. 12º. 99 pp. L. C. Page & Company. Boston. 1911.

[Illustration:

                                A
                           DECLARATION
                   OF THE CAVSES, FOR THE WHICH,
                    WEE Frederick, BY THE GRACE
                      OF GOD KING OF Bohemia,
                       COVNT PALATINE OF THE
                        Rhine, ELECTOR Of
                           The Sacred
                           Empire, &c.

                               haue

                   _ACCEPTED OF THE CROWNE OF_
                  Bohemia, AND OF THE COVNTRYES
                            Therevnto
                             annexed.

                          [Illustration]

                            MIDDLEBVRG.
                  Printed by _Abraham Schilders_.
                            M.D.C.x.x.

The Declaration

Why Frederick of the Palatinate accepted the Bohemian Crown]


ARTICLES

Arbes, Jakub. A Modern Bohemian Novelist. By J. J. Král. Poet Lore.
    Boston. 4:1-6. Jan. 15, 1892.

---- Newton’s Brain. Translated by J. J. Král. Poet Lore. Boston.
    4:429-634. Aug., Sept., Oct., Nov., Dec., 1892. Reprinted in Clever
    Tales. Copeland and Day. Boston.

---- Under a Bush of Lilacs. Translated by J. J. Král. Poet Lore.
    Boston. 4:318-28. June, July, 1892. Reprinted in Clever Tales, a
    collection of Twelve Stories by European authors. Copeland and Day.
    Boston. 1897.

---- The Solomon of a Country Town. Translated by J. J. Král. The
    Bohemian Voice. Omaha. May, June, July, Aug., 1894.

Art-Life in Bohemia. All the Year Round. (A weekly journal conducted by
    Charles Dickens.) London. 23:601-9. 1870.

Beneš-Třebízský, Václav. Farmer Krákora. Translated. The Bohemian
    Voice. Omaha. Oct., 1894.

Breuer, Libbie A. St. Lucy’s Eve. A Bohemian legend. University of
    Texas Magazine. Austin. Nov., 1910.

---- A Bohemian Ballad in verse. University of Texas Magazine. Austin.
    Dec., 1910.

Čech, Svatopluk. The Woes of a Literary Critic. Translated by Thomas
    Čapek. The Bohemian Voice. Omaha. July, 1893.

---- The Tailor and the Sparrow. Translated by J. J. Král. The Bohemian
    Voice. Omaha. Apr., 1894.

---- A Pawned Character (Zastavená povaha). Englished by Rose M.
    Humpal. The International Magazine. Chicago. 1:267-70. Oct., 1896.

---- Same, translated by J. J. Král, under title, Character in Pawn.
    Truthseeker. New York. 1901.

Herites, František. A City Son. Translated by Thomas Čapek. The
    Bohemian Voice. Omaha. May, 1893.

Němcová, Božena. Twelve Months (Dvanáct měsíců). Translated by Flora
    P. Kopta. Illustrated by F. C. Gordon. Short Stories Magazine. New
    York. Nov., 1893.

Neruda, Jan. How She Ruined a Beggar. Translated by Thomas Čapek. The
    Bohemian Voice. Omaha. May, 1893.

---- He was a Rascal. Translated by Clara Vostrovský. The Bohemian
    Voice. Omaha. Feb., 1894.

---- The Little White Stranger (Ballada Dětská.) Adapted by Libbie A.
    Breuer from a poem by ----. University of Texas Magazine, Austin.
    Dec., 1911.

---- A Week in a Quiet House. Translated by Guido Bruno. Lantern.
    Chicago. Dec., 1913; Jan., and Feb., 1914.

---- Stories Told by the Moon. Translated by Guido Bruno. Saturday
    Lantern. Chicago. Jan., 1914.

---- Day and Night. Translated by Guido Bruno. Greenwich Village. New
    York. 1:13. Feb., 1915.

---- Dead Men’s Eyes: After a Motive in Trhani (Hoboes). Translated by
    Guido Bruno. Greenwich Village. New York. 1:26. Feb., 1915.

---- A Reporter’s Diary. Translated by Guido Bruno. The Bohemian
    Review. Chicago. 1:9-13. Nov., 1917.

Svobodová, Růžena. The Penitence of Blažena. Translated by Beatrice M.
    Měkota. The Storyteller’s Magazine. New York. Christmas. 1916.

Zeyer, Julius. Phenicia’s Sin. Englished by Frances Gregor. The
    International Magazine. Chicago. 1:147-62. Sept., 1896.




IX

FOLK AND FAIRY TALES. MYTHOLOGY. LEGENDS


PUBLICATIONS

Carlyle, Thomas. Tales translated from the German. Libussa; a myth
    about the origin of Bohemia, pp. 58-97. Chapman and Hall. London.
    1827.

Curtin, Jeremiah. Myths and Folk Tales of the Russians, Western Slavs
    and Magyars. 8º. 555 pp. Six Chekh Myths and Folk Tales, pp.
    273-370. Little, Brown & Co. Boston. 1890.

---- Fairy Tales of Eastern Europe. Illustrated in color by Geo. Hood.
    259 pp. Three Fairy Tales from the Bohemian. McBride, Nast & Co.
    New York. 1914.

Czech Folk Tales. Collected and translated from different Czech
    sources. Illustrated. By Josef Baudiš. 8º. 175 pp. George Allen &
    Unwin. London. 1917.

Mythology of all Races. Herbert Gray, editor. The Slavic Section, by
    Jan Máchal of the Bohemian University of Prague. Marshall, Jones
    Company. Boston. 1917.

Naaké, John T. Slavonic Fairy Tales. Collected and translated from the
    Russian, Servian, Polish and Bohemian. 12º. 272 pp. 4 pl. H. S.
    King & Co. London. 1847.

Vernalecken, Theodore. In the Land of Marvels. Folk Tales from Austria
    and Bohemia. Sonnenschein & Co. London. 1884.

Wratislaw, A. H. Sixty Folk Tales from exclusively Slavonic sources.
    Translated from the Bohemian, with ... introduction and notes based
    on Karel J. Erben’s Folk Tales. 12º. 315 pp. E. Stock. London. 1889.


ARTICLES

Koerner, K. T. Hans Heilings Rocks: a Bohemian Legend. Translated from
    the German of ----. Blackwood’s Magazine. Edinburgh and New York.
    8:625-33. 1821.

Legends of the Giant Mountains of Bohemia. Colburn’s New Monthly.
    London. 154:79.




X

GUIDES


PUBLICATIONS

Baedeker, Karl. Section V. Bohemia and Moravia, pp. 219-72. Leipsic.
    London. New York. 1900.

Bohemian Section at the Austrian Exhibition, Earl’s Court, London,
    1906. Under the auspices of the City Council of the Royal Capital
    Prague and under the honorary presidency of Francis Count Lützow
    and Vladimír Srb, ex-mayor of Prague. With a Guide to the Bohemian
    Section and the Kingdom of Bohemia. 224 pp. Illustrated. Map. Plan.
    Alois Wiesner. Prague. 1906.

Guide, to Carlsbad. By Franz R. von Gintl. Translated by Henry S.
    Langridge. Otto Maass’ Sons. Vienna. 1909.

---- of the Bohemian Union for promoting visits of foreigners to the
    Kingdom of Bohemia. Illustrated. 40 pp. Prague. 1911.

---- to Prague and to the Kingdom of Bohemia. Illustrated. 105 pp.
    Bohemian Union for promoting visits of foreigners to the Kingdom of
    Bohemia. Unie. Prague.

---- of the City of Prague. Illustrated. 12 pp. Bohemian Union for
    promoting visits of foreigners to the Kingdom of Bohemia. Prague.

---- to the Royal Castle on the Hradschin in Prague. 4 pp.

---- to Luhačovice, Moravia. Cure Resort. Illustrated. Politika. Prague.




XI

HISTORY


PUBLICATIONS[13]

  [13] Most, if not all, the seventeenth century publications here listed
  are found in the British Museum.

A Declaration of the Cavses, for the which, Wee Frederick, ... By the
    Grace of God King of Bohemia, ... Covnt Palatine of the Rhine,
    Elector of the Second Empire, etc., haue accepted of the Crowne
    of Bohemia and of the Covntryes therevnto annexed. 4º. 23 pp.
    Middlebvrg. Printed by Abraham Schilders. Nov. 7, 1619.

A Short Relation of the Departure of the high and mightie Prince
    Frederick King Elect of Bohemia: With his royall & vertuous Ladie
    Elizabeth. And thryse hopefull yong Prince Henrie, from Heydelberg
    towards Prague, to receive the Crowne of that Kingdome. Whearunto
    is annexed the Solempnitie or maner of the Coronation. Translated
    out of dutch. And now both togither published (with other reasons,
    and iustifications) to give satisfaction to the world, as touching
    the ground, and truth, of his Maties proceedings, & vndertakings
    of that Kingdome of Bohemia: lawfully and freelie Elected, by
    the generall consent of the States, not ambitiouslie aspiring
    thearvnto, etc. 4º. Printed by George Waters. At Dort. 1619.

Newes from Bohemia. An Apologie Made by the States of the Kingdome of
    Bohemia, shewing the Reasons why those of the Reformed Religion
    were moued to take Armes, for the defence of the King and
    themselues, especially against the dangerous Sect of Iesuites. With
    a plaine Declaration, that those who belong vnto the Monasteries
    and Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction (according vnto his Maiesties
    Letters, and Agreements made betweene the States of the Reformed
    Religion and the Papists) haue good right, as being Subiects of
    the Imperiall Maiestie, to the peaceable exercise of their Diuine
    Seruice, and building of Churches. Translated out of the Dutch into
    Latine, and thence into English, by Will. Philip. Printed by George
    Purslow for Ralph Rounthwaite and are to bee sold at his Shop, at
    the Signe of the Flower de luce and Crowne, in Pauls Church-Yard.
    London. 1619.

The Reasons which Compelled the States of Bohemia to reiect the
    Archiduke Ferdinand, etc., inforced them to elect a new king.
    Togeather vvith The Proposition which was made vpon the first
    motion of the chocie (choice) of th’ Elector Palatine to be King of
    Bohemia, by the States of that Kingdome in their publique assembly
    on the 16th of August, being the birth day of the same Elector
    Palatine. Translated out of the french copies. 4º. 30 pp. By John
    Harrison. Printet by George Waters. At Dort. 1619.

Gallants, to Bohemia, Or, let vs to the Warres againe: Shewing the
    forwardnesse of our English Souldiers, both in times past, and at
    this present. To a pleasant new Warlike tune. In two parts, with
    two cuts. Imprinted at London, by G. E. 1619.

The Declaration and Information of the High and Puissant King of
    Bohemia, against the vniust Mandates in the name of the Emperour:
    As also against those that are further threatned to be decreed and
    executed, touching the Crowne of Bohemia. Given at Prague the 1. of
    July, 1620. No imprint. London.

A Most true Relation of the late Proceedings in Bohemia, Germany and
    Hungaria. Dated the 1. the 10. and the 13. of July, this present
    yeere 1620. As also the happie Arrivall of Sir Andrew Gray into
    Lusatia. Together with the Articles of Peace betweene Maximilian,
    Elector of Bavaria, on the part of the Catholikes and Joachim
    Ernest, Margrave of Brandenburg, on the part of the Princes of the
    Reformed Religion in Germany in the Citie of Ulme, the third of
    July last. Faithfully translated out of the high Dutch. 4º. 14 pp.
    Ornamented. Dort. 1620.

A Letter written by a French Gent: of the King of Bohemia his Army:
    Concerning the Emperour Ferdinand his Embassage into France.
    Translated out of the French Coppie. 4º. 13 pp. Printed at
    Flushing. 1620.

The Popes (Paul V.) Complaint to his Minion Cardinals, against the good
    successe of the Bohemians and their generall Proceedings. In verse.
    4º. 26 pp. 1620(?).

Prosopopoe. Or, a Conference held at Angelo Castle, between the Pope,
    the Emperor, and the King of Spaine. In verse. 1620(?).

The Late Good successe and victory, which it pleased God to give to
    some of the King of Bohemia’s Forces, vnder the Conduct of the
    Prince Anhalt, Generall for the said King, Against the two great
    Generalls of the Emperour, Bucquoy and Dampiere, atchieued neare
    Horne in Austria. With many other considerable things concerning
    the affaires of that Countrye. Vnto which is added the Articles
    of agreement, made betweene the said King of Bohemia and Bethlem
    Gaber, Prince of Hungaria and Transiluania. Printed by Abrahm
    Schilders. Middleburg. 1620.

A Cleare Demonstration that Ferdinand is by his own demerits fallen
    from the Kingdome of Bohemia and the incorporate Provinces. Written
    by Nobleman of Polonia. And translated out of the second edition
    enlarged. Printed by George Waters. 4º. 25 pp. Dort. 1620.

An Answere to the Qvestion: Whether the Emperour that now is, can bee
    Iudge in the Bohemian Controuersie or no? Together with the Extract
    taken out of the Acts of the Dyet at Auspurghe, in the yeare 1584;
    Concerning the Kingdome of Bohemia. 1620.

Two Letters of Embassies. The one Sent by the States of Bohemia, to
    the Elector of Saxony. The other from the Popes Holines to the
    Emperour, concerning the Troubles of Germany. (William Barlow
    writes dedication to H. C. & Thos. Frodringham to W. B.) Printet
    (!) at Amsterdam. 1620.

[Illustration: Elizabeth Stuart (1596-1662)

Daughter of James I. of England, wife of Frederick of the Palatinate,
Queen of Bohemia from 1619 to 1620]

A Proclamation made by the High and Mighty Fredericke by the Grace
    of God King of Bohemia, etc., Commanding All those his Subjects
    (altered in MS. to Feodaries) which are now in the Service of his
    Majesties Enemies, to repair Home within the space of 14. dayes,
    vpon paine of his Highnes displeasure, and Confiscation of Goods
    and Lands. Translated out of the Dutch Coppie 4º. 6 pp. Printed at
    Prague. 1620.

A Relation Containing the Manner of the Solemnities at the Election
    and Coronation of Ferdinand the Emperour, in Francford the 30. of
    August last past, 1619. With other occurrences in Bohemia, and
    divers parts of Germany, for three Moneths last past. 4º. 43 pp.
    Printed for Robert Mylbourne. London. 1620.

The Trve Copies of Svndrie Letters concerning the Affaires of Bohemia,
    as they have beene seuerally written in High Dutch, Latine and
    French, to Princes, and other men of account. Ornamented. No
    imprint nor note of the translator. 1620.

The Present State of the Affaires betwixt the Emperor and the King
    of Bohemia, and their Confederates as it hath beene very Truely
    related, by certaine Letters Sent by Persons of extraordinary
    qualities, etc. Together with the occurents lately happened in the
    Armies of Generall Veere, the Princes of the Vnion and Spinola.
    Translated out of the French, and High Dutch Coppies. 4º. 22 pp.
    1620.

The Bohemian Lawes or Rights Defended, Against the Informer: or an
    Answer to an Information, falsly so called, secretly printed and
    divulged against the Writings published by the States of Bohemia.
    Translated out of Latin by I. H. (John Harrison). This is followed
    by & forms one with: The Instruments of the Pactions or Conditions
    concerning a Perpetuall Succession in the Kingdomes of Hungary and
    Bohemia, and the Provinces thereunto belonging. 4º. 16 pp. 1620.

A Plaine Demonstration of the Vnlawful Succession of the now Emperovr
    Ferdinand the Second, because of the incestuous Marriage of his
    Parents. Translated out of the Latine printed copie. Printed at the
    Hage. 4º. 1620.

Bohemia Regnum Electivum. That is, A Plaine and True Relation of the
    proceeding of the States of Bohemia, from the first foundation of
    that Province, by Free Election of Princes and Kings vnto Ferdinand
    the eighteenth King of the house of Austria. Wherein is evidently
    manifested, that the first Princes were elected, and no true and
    simple Hereditary Succession established, nor practiced in all that
    time, containing about 900. yeares; taken out of vnpartial and
    Classique Authors. 4º. 26 pp. 1620. No further imprint.

The Last Newes from Bohemia, with all the adioyning Prouinces that be
    now vp in Armes. Wherein is related all the passages that haue
    happened since the high and mighty Prince Elector Palatine of the
    Rhine was elected and Crowned King of Bohemia, with other accidents
    very delightfull to the Reader. 4º. 1620.

En English-Man’s Love to Bohemia; with a friendly Farewell to all the
    noble souldiers that goe from Great Britaine to that honorable
    expedition, etc. In verse by John Taylor. 4º. 10 pp. Dort. With
    the arms of Sir M. M. Sykes stamped on the covers. London. 1620.

The Instruments of the pactions or conditions concerning a perpetuall
    succession in the Kingdomes of Hungary and Bohemia and the
    prouinces thereunto belonging ... made at Prague, Philip the III.
    King of Spaine, renouncing his right.... Ferdinand, Arch-Duke of
    Austria accepting ... them.... Mathias the II. Emperor of Rome ...
    confirming them. 16 pp. London. (?) 1620.

Two Letters or Embassies. The one Sent by the States of Bohemia to
    the Elector of Saxony: the other from the Popes Holines to the
    Emperour, concerning the Troubles of Germany. Translated by W.
    Barlow. 4º. Amsterdam. 1620.

A Briefe Description of the reasons that make the Declaration of the
    Ban made against the King of Bohemia, as being Elector Palatine,
    Dated the 22 of Januarie last past, of no value nor worth, and
    therefore not to be respected. 4º. 13 pp. Printed at the Hayf by
    Arnold Meuris. 1621.

A True Relation of the Bloudy Execution, lately performed by the
    Commaundment of the Emperors Maiestie, vpon the persons of some
    Chiefe statesmen, and others, in Prague, the chiefe City of the
    Kingdom of Bohemia; the 11th of June, 1621. With the Manner and
    Proceedings therein observed. Faithfully translated out of the
    Dutch copye. 4º. 24 pp. Printed the 21st of July, 1621.

The King of Bohemia’s Welcome to Count Mansfield, And into the
    Palatinate: With the defeat of Bavaria’s and Monsieur Tilley’s
    Army, since his Arrivall: (the King being there in person). Their
    resolution to March into Bavaria. The Papists feare of his good
    successe, and further progression: And many other remarkable things
    concerning Brvnswick and his Actions. Faithfully taken out of the
    Letters of best Credit. 4º. 19 pp. Printed. 1622.

The Apollogie of the illustrious Prince Ernestus, Earle of Mansfield, &
    Wherein from his first Entertainment, are laid open the Occasions
    of his Warres in Bohemia, Austria, and the Palatinate, with his
    faithfull Services to the King of Bohemia. Translated out of the
    Originall French coppie. 4º. 76 pp. Printed at Heidelbergh. 1622.

The Continvation of the German History. Part V. The History of the
    Present Warres of Germany. Part VI. The German History Continued.
    Part VII. The Modern History of the World. Printed for Nath. Butter
    and Nicholas Bourne. London. 1632-35.

The Great and Famous Battle of Lutzen, fought between the renowned
    King of Sweden and Walstain. Wherein were left dead upon the Place
    between Five and Six Thousand of the Imperialists, where the King
    himself was unfortunately slain, whose Death counterpoised all
    the other. Pappenheim, Merode, Isolani, and divers other great
    Commanders, were offered up like so many Sacrifices on the Swedish
    Alter, to the memory of their King. Here is also inserted an
    Abridgdment of the King of Bohemia’s Death, faithfully translated
    out of the French copy. 4º. 45 pp. London. 1633.

The Relation of the Death of Albrecht Wenzel Eusebius von Waldstein,
    the Duke of Friedland. Together with the cause thereof. A coppy of
    the oath taken by his Commandere (to be faithfull unto him) but a
    little before the same, etc. London. 1634.

Monroe or Munro, Robert Colonel. Monro his expedition with the worthy
    Scots Regiment (called Mac-Keyes Regiment) levied in August 1626 by
    Sir Donald Mac-Key Lord Rhees, Colonell for his Majesties service
    of Denmark, and reduced after the Battaile of Nerling, to one
    Company in September 1634, at Wormes in the Paltz.... Collected and
    gathered together ... by Colonell Robert Monro, etc. Dedicated to
    the Elector Palatine, son of Frederick. Part I, 84 pp., and table.
    Part II, 244 pp., and table. 8º. Printed by William Jones. London.
    1637.

A Protestation of the Most High and Mighty Prince Charles Lodowicke,
    Count Palatine of the Rhine, Archidapifer, and Prince Elector of
    the sacred Empire, Duke of Bavaria, etc. Translated out of the
    High-Dutch, into English, French, and Latine and Printed at London
    for Richard Whitaker. 4º. 26 pp. 1637.

The Dutie of Sir Francis Wortley deliniated, in his pious pitty and
    Christian Commiseration of the sorrowes or sufferings of the most
    vertuous, yet unfortunate lady Elizabeth, queene of Bohemia;
    being a dedication to fame and truth, prefer’d to both the houses
    of Parliament. By her humble servant and honourer, Sir Francis
    Wortley, Knight and barronet. London. 1641.

A Declaration of his Highness, for a collection towards the relief of
    divers Protestant Churches driven out of Poland; and of twenty
    Protestant families driven out of the confines of Bohemia. Printed
    by Henry Hills and John Field. London. 1658.

An Animadversion upon the late Lord Protector’s Declaration, for the
    distressed Churches of Lesna, etc. London. 1659.

A Prospect of Hungary, and Transylvania, With a Catalogue of the
    Kings of the one, and the Princes of the other; Together with an
    account of the Qualities of the Inhabitants, the Commodities of the
    Countries, ... An Historical Narration of the bloody Wars amongst
    themselves, and with the Turks; continued to this present Year
    1664. As also A brief Description of Bohemia.... 4º. Printed for
    William Miller. London. 1664.

Death of John of Luxembourg, King of Bohemia, described in The French
    King Conquered by the English. 8º. 31 pp. Printed for William Birch
    at the Sign of the Peacock, at the lower end of Cheapside. London.
    1678.

The Annals of King James and King Charles the First. Both of Happy
    Memory. Containing a Faithful History, and impartial Account of the
    Great Affairs of State, and Transactions of Parliaments in England,
    etc. Printed by Tho. Braddyll, for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock in
    St. Pauls Church-yard, London. 1681.

Historical Register and Chronicle of English Affairs, before and
    after the restoration of King Charles II. Comprehending the most
    authentick materials relating to the Transactions of this Kingdom,
    Ecclesiastical, Civil and Military. Letter by Joh. A. Comenius
    (Latin) on behalf of the Bohemian Church, dated Amsterdam Sep.,
    1661. London. 1744.

Benger, Elizabeth Ogilvie. Memoirs of Elizabeth Stuart, Queen of
    Bohemia, daughter of King James the First. 2 vs. 8º. Longmans,
    Hurst, Rees, Orme, Brown and Green. London. 1825.

Berkeley, George Monck. Literary Relics; containing Original Letters
    from King Charles II., King James, the Queen of Bohemia, Swift,
    Berkeley, Addison, Steele, Congreve, The Duke of Ormond and the
    Bishop Rundle; with an Inquiry into the Life of Dean Swift. London.
    1789.

Blazé, de Bury (Marie Rose Stewart). Memoirs of the Princess Palatine
    of Bohemia; including her correspondence with the great men of her
    day. 8º. 400 pp. R. Bentley. London. 1853.

Bohemia. Elizabeth, Queen of ----. Twenty-five Unpublished Letters from
    the Queen of Bohemia, daughter of James I. to Sir Edward Nicholas
    between April, 1655 to January, 1656. Footnotes by John Evans. The
    letters which passed between the Queen and Sir Edward, from August,
    1654 to January, 1655, fifteen in number, have been published in
    the Appendix to Evelyn’s Diary, edited by Bray. Archælogia: or,
    Miscellaneous Tracts relating to Antiquity. Society of Antiquaries
    of London. 37:244-43.

---- General Index to Dodsleys Annual Register from its Commencement
    in 1758 to the Year 1819. London. 1826. Invaded by the King
    of Prussia, 1:9, 16, 42; Battle of Prague, 1:16; Prince Henry
    enters, 2:9; Ravaged by the Prussians, 14:83, 16:43; Mortality in,
    15:152, 16:43; Abridgment of statute work, 18:153; Insurrections
    in, 18:151, 103, 187; Abolition of slavery, 27:13; Enrolment of a
    militia, 38:283.

---- A Brief Evaluation of Bohemia’s Contribution to Civilization.
    Illustrated. Edited by J. J. Zmrhal and Vojta Beneš. Articles by:
    Harry Pratt Judson, Bohemia--A Foreword. J. J. Zmrhal, Contribution
    to Literature. J. E. S. Vojan, Music. Vojta Beneš, Art. L. J.
    Fisher, The Sokols. 64 pp. The Bohemian National Alliance in
    America. Chicago. 1917.

Bolton, Henry Carrington. The Follies of Science at the Court of
    Rudolph II., 1552-1612. 217 pp. Illustrated. Plates and portraits.
    The Pharmaceutical Review Publishing Co. Milwaukee. 1904.

Čapek, Thomas. Bohemia Past and Present. 12 pp. Reprint of an article
    in the Omaha Bee, on Bohemian Day at the Trans-Mississippi
    Exposition, held at Omaha, Nebraska, Aug. 27, 1898.

---- The Slovaks of Hungary, Slavs and Panslavism. 8º. 214 pp. The
    Knickerbocker Press. New York. 1906.

Carleton, Sir Dudley. Letters from and to ... during his Embassy in
    Holland, from January to December 1620. 510 pp. London. 1780. The
    Bohemian Estates have a secret agent at the Hague, p. 317. Queen
    Elizabeth gains the love of the Bohemians by her free and gracious
    demeanor, p. 419. King Frederick (of the Palatinate) not supported
    by his father-in-law, King James I. Aid given him by the Holland
    states general, p. 425. His ambassador to the states, pp. 436, 438,
    442. Not acknowledged by King James I., his father-in-law, nor the
    French King, p. 436. His election disliked by the latter, p. 440.
    The Bohemians desire to borrow the sum of 600,000 florins of the
    states general, p. 314. Assistance for them from the states general
    solicited, p. 337. Preparations in all parts against them, p. 339.
    Suspension of arms between them and the emperor, p. 347. They send
    two agents to the states general, p. 355. Troops raised for them,
    p. 357. A letter written in their favor by the states general to
    King James I., p. 359. The Bohemian agents furnished by the states
    with two months advance, p. 369.

Chapman, Benjamin. The History of Gustavus Adolphus and of the Thirty
    Years’ War, up to the King’s Death: with some account of its
    conclusion by the Peace of Westphalia, anno 1648. 8º. 441 pp.
    Bohemia, chap. 5. Longmans, Brown, Green and Longmans. London. 1856.

Colquhoun, Archibald R. and Ethel. The Whirlpool of Europe.
    Austria-Hungary and the Hapsburgs. Illustrated. 338 pp. Dodd, Mead
    & Co. New York. 1907.

Cox, William. History of the House of Austria, from the foundation of
    the Monarchy by Rhodolph of Hapsburgh, to the death of Leopold the
    Second, 1218-1792. London. 1807.

Eden, Lizzie Selina. A Lady’s Glimpse of the Late War in Bohemia. 8º.
    313 pp. Hurst & Blackett. London. 1867.

Eisenmann, Louis. Austria-Hungary. Chap. 7, v. 12, pp. 174-212.
    Cambridge Modern History. University Press. Cambridge. 1910.

Englishman. The Austro-Hungarian Empire and the Policy of Count Beust.
    A Political Sketch of Men and Events from 1866 to 1870. By an ----.
    8º. 331 pp. Chapman and Hall. London. 1870.

Fitz-Simon, Henry. Words of Comfort to Persecuted Catholics. Written in
    exile, anno 1607. Letters from a cell in Dublin Castle, and Diary
    of the Bohemian War of 1620. With a sketch of his life by E. Hogan.
    8º. 284 pp. Gill & Son. Dublin. 1881.

Gardiner, Samuel Rawson, editor. Letters and other Documents
    illustrating the relations between England and Germany at the
    Commencement of the Thirty Years’ War. From the Outbreak of the
    Revolution in Bohemia to the election of the Emperor Ferdinand II.,
    pp. 212. From the Election of the Emperor Ferdinand II. to the
    Close of the Conferences at Mühlhausen, pp. 194. Camden Society.
    London. 1865.

---- The Thirty Years’ War, 1618-1648. Longmans, Brown, Green and
    Longmans. London. 1874.

Gindely, Anton. History of the Thirty Years’ War. Translated by A.
    Ten Brook. With an introduction and a concluding chapter by the
    translator. 2 vs. Maps. Portrait. 8º. G. P. Putnam’s Sons. New
    York. 1884.

[Illustration:

                                THE
                            DECLARATION
                                AND
                            INFORMATION
                  Of the High and Puissant King of
              _Bohemia_, against the vniust Mandates
                      published in the name of
                           the Emperour:

              _As also against those that are further_
               threatned to be decreed and executed,
                       touching the Crowne of
                              BOHEMIA.

                           [Illustration]

                            M. D. C. X. X.

The Declaration

Concerning the unjust Mandates against the Bohemians]

Glenn, Thomas Allen. Some Colonial Mansions. Edited by ----. Augustine
    Herrman of Bohemia Manor, v. 1, pp. 121-38. Fredrych Philipse, v.
    2, pp. 243-78. Henry T. Coates and Company. Philadelphia. 1897.

Green, Mary Anne Everett. Elizabeth, Electress Palatine and Queen of
    Bohemia. Revised by her niece, S. C. Lomas. With a prefatory note
    by A. W. Ward. 8º. 469 pp. Methuen & Co. London. 1855.

Gregor, Frances. The Story of Bohemia. 8º. 486 pp. Cranston & Curts.
    Cincinnati. Hunt & Eaton. New York. 1895.

Hayes, Carleton J. H. Political and Social History of Modern Europe. 2
    vs. 8º. Maps. The Macmillan Co. New York. 1916.

Hazen, Charles Downes. Europe since 1815. Henry Holt and Company. New
    York. 1910.

---- Modern European History. Illustrated. Maps. Henry Holt and
    Company. New York. 1917.

Innes, J. H. New Amsterdam and its People. Studies, social and
    topographical, of the town under Dutch and early English rule. With
    maps, plans, views. 365 pp. Augustyn Herrman’s life, portrait, etc.
    Charles Scribner’s Sons. New York. 1902.

Jenkins, Robert Charles. The Last Crusader: or, The Life and Times of
    Cardinal Julian, of the House of Cesarini. A Historical Sketch. 8º.
    408 pp. R. Bentley. London. 1861.

Jičínský, J. Rudiš. Historical Sketch of Bohemian Freethought in the
    United States. 20 pp. Freethought Society. Cedar Rapids. Reprint of
    an article from the Truth Seeker. New York. 1908.

Kerner, R. J. Bohemia under Leopold II., 1790-1792. A study in
    the political, economic and social history of Bohemia in the
    eighteenth Century. 415 pp. MS. Harvard University Library. 1914.

Leger, Louis Paul Marie. A History of Austro-Hungary from the earliest
    times to the year 1889. Translated from the French by Mrs. Birbeck
    Hill, with a preface by Edward A. Freeman. 672 pp. G. P. Putnam’s
    Sons. New York.

Lodge, Henry Cabot, editor. Austria-Hungary. Based on the work of Louis
    P. M. Leger, by Wm. E. Lingelbach. v. 17. Illustrated. 468 pp. John
    D. Morris and Company. Philadelphia. 1906.

Lützow, Count. Bohemia. An Historical Sketch. 12º. 359 pp. J. M. Dent
    & Sons. London. E. P. Dutton & Co. New York. 1896.

---- Lectures on the Historians of Bohemia; being the Ilchester
    Lectures for the year 1904. 8º. 120 pp. Henry Frowde. London. 1905.

---- Later Thoughts of the Apostles of Moravia and Bohemia.
    Transactions of the Royal Society of Literature. v. 30. London.
    1911.

---- Bohemia. Reprint from the 11th edition of the Encyclopædia
    Britannica. 55 pp. Bohemian National Council. Prague. 1911.

Mallery, Charles Payson. Ancient Families of Bohemia Manor, their homes
    and their graves. 4º. 74 pp. The Historical Society of Delaware.
    Wilmington. 1888.

Maurice, Charles Edmund. The Revolutionary Movement of 1848-49 in
    Italy, Austria-Hungary and Germany, with some examination of the
    previous thirty-three years. 515 pp. G. Bell & Sons. London. 1887.

---- Bohemia: from the earliest times to the fall of national
    independence in 1620: with a short summary of later events.
    Illustrated. 8º. 533 pp. T. Fisher Unwin. London. G. P. Putnam’s
    Sons. New York. 1896.

Michiels, Alfred. Secret History of the Austrian Government and of its
    systematic persecutions of Protestants. The Austrian System applied
    in Bohemia, pp. 18-45. Compiled from official documents. Chapman
    and Hall. London. 1859.

Mitchell, John, Major General. The Life of Wallenstein, Duke of
    Friedland. 8º. 368 pp. James Fraser. London. 1837.

Monroe, Will S. Bohemia and the Čechs. The history, people,
    institutions, and the geography of the Kingdom, together with
    accounts of Moravia and Silesia. Illustrated. 12º. Map. 45 pl. 10
    portraits. 488 pp. D. C. Page & Co. Boston. 1910.

Newman, Francis William. The Crimes of the House of Hapsburg against
    its own Liege Subjects. 12º. 60 pp. John Chapman. London. 1853.

Peabody, Elizabeth P. Crimes of the House of Austria against Mankind.
    Collected from accredited history and edited by ----. 230 pp.
    Bohemia, pp. 65-90. For the benefit of the Hungarian fund, by
    Rudolph Garrigue. New York. 1852.

Poyntz, Sydnam. A True Relation of these German Warres from Mansfield’s
    going out of England which was in the yeare 1624 until this last
    yeare 1636 whereof my self was an ey-witnesse of most I have here
    related as followeth. By Mee Sydnam Poynes. 144 pp. Edited for the
    Royal Historical Society by A. T. S. Goodrick. London. 1908.

Putnam, Samuel P. 400 Years of Freethought. Pp. 634-37 allude to
    Bernard Bolzano, Francis M. Klácel, Karel Havlíček, Augustin
    Smetana, Jakub Arbes, Jaroslav Vrchlický; pp. 155-58 to J. A.
    Komenský. Illustrated. 8º. 874 pp. The Truth Seeker Company. New
    York.

Reich, Emil. Hungary and the Slavonic Kingdoms. Chap. 10, v. 1, pp.
    329-46. Cambridge Modern History. University Press. Cambridge. 1902.

Šašek, Václav of Bírkov (?). Diary of an Embassy from King George of
    Bohemia to King Louis XI. of France in the year of Grace 1464. From
    a contemporary MS. Literally translated from the original Slavonic
    (Bohemian) by A. H. Wratislaw. 8º. 80 pp. Bell & Daldy. London.
    1871.

Sidney, Sir Philip and Hubert Languet. Correspondence of ----. Now
    first collected and translated from the Latin with notes and a
    memoir of Sidney by Steuart Pears. Letters dated Prague, 18 Sep.,
    1575, relates to Bohemia, p. 100; John Hus, p. 94; Baron Slavata,
    pp. 22, 113. William Pickering. London. 1845.

Smith, Charlotte Fell. Life of John Dee (1527-1608), astrologer at
    the Court of Rudolph II. Portraits and illustrations. Numerous
    references to persons and places in Bohemia. Constable & Company.
    London. 1909.

Steed, Henry Wickham. The Hapsburg Monarchy. 8º. 304 pp. Constable &
    Company. London. 1913.

Stiles, William H. Austria in 1848-49: Being a history of the late
    political movements in Vienna, Milan, Venice and Prague. 2 vs.
    Harper & Bros. New York. 1852.

Strickland, Agnes. Lives of the Queens of England, from the Norman
    conquest; with anecdotes of their courts now first published from
    official records and other authentic documents, private as well
    as public. Anne of Bohemia,[14] surnamed the Good, First Queen
    of Richard II., pp. 206-22. 3 vs. in 1. 8º. Blanchard & Lea.
    Philadelphia. 1855.

  [14] “It is possible,” says Wickliffe in his work called _The Threefold
  Bond of Love_, “that our noble queen of England, sister of the Cæsar, may
  have the gospel written in three languages,--Bohemian, German and Latin;
  now, to heredicate her on that account, would be Luciferian folly.” Agnes
  Strickland’s _Lives of the Queens of England_, v. 1, p. 599.

Vickers, Robert H. History of Bohemia. 8º. 757 pp. 1 map. 21
    illustrations. Charles H. Sergel Company. Chicago. 1894.

Ward, A. W. The Outbreak of the Thirty Years’ War. Chap. 1, v. 4, pp.
    1-34. The Protestant Collapse 1620-30. Chap. 3, v. 4, pp. 64-84.
    Cambridge Modern History. University Press. Cambridge. 1906.

Williams, W. H. Elizabeth Stewart, Queen of Bohemia, pp. 189-92.
    Portrait. Transactions of the Historic Society of Lancashire and
    Cheshire for the year of 1916. Printed for the Society. Liverpool.
    1917.

Wratislaw, Mitrowitz Wenceslas, Baron. Adventures of ----. What he
    saw in the Turkish metropolis, Constantinople; experienced in his
    captivity; and after his happy return to his country. Committed to
    writing in the year of our Lord 1599. Literally translated from the
    original Bohemian by A. H. Wratislaw. 8º. 256 pp. Bell & Daldy.
    London. 1862.

Wratislaw, A. H. How Saints are made at Rome in Modern Days. An enquiry
    into the canonization of St. John Nepomucen (patron saint of
    Bohemia) in 1729. 16º. London. 1866.

---- Life, Legend, and Canonization of St. John Nepomucen, Patron Saint
    and Protector of the Order of the Jesuits. 8º. 86 pp. Bell & Daldy.
    London. 1872.


ARTICLES

Baker, James. A Great Historian (Palacký) Honoured. The Times and
    Mirror. London. July 15, 1912.

---- Bohemia. An Historical Sketch. Athenæum. London. Sept. 19, 1896.

Bohemian History. English Historical Review. London. 29:131-33. Jan.,
    1914.

Cope, G. Will of Augustine Herrman. Pennsylvania Magazine of History.
    Philadelphia. 15:321.

Hrdlička, Aleš. Civilization of Bohemia. Science. New York. 30:880.
    Dec. 17, 1909.

Hye, Isadoor. Bohemian Embassy to England, Spain, etc., in 1466.
    Quarterly Review. London. 90:413-44. 1852. See, Václav Šašek of
    Bírkov.

Jacox, F. Seacoast of Bohemia; a vexed question in Shakespearian
    geography. Bentley’s Miscellany. London. 61:205-11. 1867; same,
    Bohemian Voice. Omaha. 3:8-9. Sept., 1894.

Král, Josef Jiří. Shakespeare in Bohemia. Poet Lore. Boston. 4:231-32.
    Apr., 1892.

Palacký, Francis. History of Bohemia; the most part from MS. and
    original documents. Review in Foreign Quarterly Review. London.
    20:21-38. 1838.

Šafařík, Paul J. Sclavonian Antiquities. Review in Foreign Quarterly
    Review. London. 20:21-38. 1838; same, 26:57-80. 1841.

Vericour, L. R. de. Bohemia Past and Present. Transactions of the Royal
    Historical Society. London. 2:54-76. 1873.

Wratislaw, A. H. How History is Sometimes Written. Frazer’s Magazine.
    London. 12:519-27. 1875.

---- Bloody Parliament of Wilemow. Frazer’s Magazine. London.
    14:294-301. 1876.

---- St. Procop of Bohemia: a Legend of the Eleventh Century.
    Transactions of the Royal Historical Society. London. 4:439-48.
    1876.

---- History of Bohemia. Athenæum. London. 2:597-734. 1882.




XII

JOHN HUS. JEROME OF PRAGUE. UNITED BRETHREN. MORAVIANS


PUBLICATIONS

Baker, James. A Forgotten Great Englishman; or the Life and Work of
    Peter Payne, the Wycliffite. Illustrated. 8º. 160 pp. The Religious
    Tract Society. London. 1894.

Benham, David. Notes on the Origin and Episcopate of the Bohemian
    Brethren. 148 pp. Dalton & Lucy. London. 1867.

---- Bohemian and Moravian Brethren. Translated from the German. 12º.
    Bradford. 1822.

Bohemian Brethren. Note on the Reformation in Poland. V. 2, pp. 634-38.
    Cambridge Modern History. University Press. Cambridge. 1903.

Bonnechose, Francois Paul Emile Boisnormand de. The Reformers before
    the Reformation. The Fifteenth Century. John Huss and the Council
    of Constance. Translated from the French by Campbell Mackenzie. 8º.
    2 vs. 659 pp. William Whyte & Co. Edinburgh. 1844.

---- Letters of John Huss, written during his exile and imprisonment.
    With Martin Luther’s Preface, and containing a general view of
    the works of Huss. Translated by Campbell Mackenzie. 8º. 244 pp.
    William Whyte & Co. Edinburgh. 1846.

Bost, Ami. History of the Bohemian and Moravian Brethren. Translated
    from the French, and abridged, with an appendix. 12º. 428 pp. The
    Religious Tract Society. London. 1838.

Chase, Edith Fowler. The Bohemians. A Study of the Land of the Cup and
    the Book. Illustrated. 8º. 63 pp. Fleming H. Revell Company. New
    York. 1914.

Cranz, David. The Ancient and Modern History of the Brethren.
    Translated from the German of ---- with Notes and Emendations, by
    Benjamin La Trobe. 8º. 726 pp. W. & A. Strachan. London. 1780.

Creighton, M. A History of the Papacy during the Period of Reformation.
    2 vs. Houghton Mifflin Company. Boston. 1882.

Fisher, George Park. History of the Christian Church. With maps. 701
    pp. Bohemia, pp. 164-409. Charles Scribner’s Sons. New York. 1887.

Fox, John (Martyrologist). The History of the Ten Persecutions in the
    Primitive Church. To which is added, An Account of the Martyrdom of
    John Huss and Jerome of Prague; together with divers Letters, wrote
    by John Huss while he was under Persecution. Extracted from the
    Martyrology of Mr. John Fox. Printed by John Gray and Gavin Alston
    ... for Andrew Leslie.... 8º. 402 pp. Edinburgh. 1761.

---- Book of Martyrs: a complete and authentic Account of the Lives,
    Sufferings and triumphant Deaths of the Primitive and Protestant
    Martyrs in all parts of the World. With Notes, comments and
    illustrations, by the Rev. J. Milner. 8º. London. 1848. Numerous
    editions.

---- Book of Martyrs. Hus, Žižka and Jerome, pp. 150-68. John F.
    Winston Co. Chicago.

Gataker, Thomas and others. The City Ministers unmasked, or the
    Hypocrisie and Iniquitie of Fifty nine of the most eminent of
    the Clergy, in and about the City of London. Clearly discovered
    out of two of their own pamphlets, One Intituled, A Serious and
    Faithful Representation; The other a Vindication of the Ministers
    of the Gospel, in and about the City of London. Together with a
    Prophesie of John Hus, touching the Choosing of a new Ministry; and
    an ancient Prophetical farewel of Hildegards, to the old corrupt
    Ministry. Both very useful for the Knowledg of the long deceived
    Nations. By a friend of the Armies, in its ways of Justice and
    Righteousness. 4º. 31 pp. Printed for Giles Calvert. London. 1649.

Gillett, Ezra Hall. The Life and Times of John Hus, or the Bohemian
    Reformation of the Fifteenth Century. 8º. 2 vs. 632 pp. Gould and
    Lincoln. Boston. 1863-64.

Gilpin, William. The Lives of John Wickliff; and of the Most Eminent of
    his Disciples, Lord Cobham, John Huss, Jerome of Prague, and Zisca.
    8º. 368 pp. 1 portrait. J. Robson. London. 1765.

[Illustration: IOHAN-AMOS COMENIVS MORAUVS. Aº ÆTAT. 60, 1652,

    _Loe, here an Exile, who to serue his God,
      Hath sharply tasted of proud Pashurs Rod,
    Whose learning, Piety, & true worth beeing knowne
      To all the world, makes all the world his owne,_

John Amos Komenský

Portrait after Wenceslaus Hollar]

Gradin, Arvid, member of the church. A Short History of the
    Bohemian-Moravian Protestant Church of the United Brethren. In a
    letter to the Archbishop of Upsal. Primate of Sweden. 8º. 64 pp.
    James Hutton. London. 1743.

Hamilton, John Taylor. A History of the Church known as the Moravian
    Church, or the Unitas Fratrum, or the Unity of the Brethren, during
    the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. 631 pp. 20 port. Times
    Publication Co. Bethlehem. 1900.

Hasse, A. C. The United Brethren (Moravians) in England, from
    1641-1742. 8º. 38 pp. W. Mallalieu & Co. London. 1867.

Herrick, S. E. Heretics of Yesterday. Houghton Mifflin Company. Boston.
    1885.

Hodgson, William. The Lives, Sentiments and Sufferings of some of the
    Reformers and Martyrs before, since and independent of the Lutheran
    reformation. 8º. 465 pp. J. B. Lippincott & Co. Philadelphia. 1867.

Holmes, John. History of the Protestant Church of the United Brethren.
    2 vs. 8º. 848 pp. London. 1825-1830.

Hus, John, and Jerome of Prague, the Bohemian Martyrs. Sketches of
    their Lives. Presbyterian Board of Publication. Philadelphia. 1868.

Hus, John. Article on, 9th ed. Encyclopædia Britannica, by John
    Sutherland Black.

---- De Ecclesia. The Church. Translated, with notes and introduction
    by David S. Schaff. 8º. 304 pp. Charles Scribner’s Sons. New York.
    1915.

---- The Letters of ---- with introductions and explanatory notes. By
    Herbert B. Workman and R. Martin Pope. 8º. 286 pp. Hodder and
    Stoughton. London. 1904.

---- or, The Council of Constance: a Poem. With historical and
    descriptive notes. 12º. C. J. G. and F. Rivington. London. 1829.

---- The Five Hundredth Anniversary of the Birth of ----, the Bohemian
    Reformer and Martyr. 8 pp. Celebrated at Bethlehem, Pa. July 6,
    1873.

---- Independent Bohemia. Memorial in honor of the quincentenary of
    ----. 4 pp. London. July 6, 1915.

---- Martyrdom, Semi-millenial Commemoration of ----, held in
    Cleveland, O., July 6th, 1915. With articles by Herbert Adolphus
    Miller, Count Lützow, Šárka B. Hrbkova. 16 pp. Cleveland. 1915.

---- Memorial of the Central Association of Freethought Societies for
    the Hus Celebrations in Chicago. 62 pp. By J. J. Král. 1915.

---- In honor of the quincentenary of ----. The Future of Bohemia: a
    lecture delivered at King’s College, London, by Robert William
    Seton-Watson. 8º. 31 pp. Nisbet & Co. London. 1915.

---- The Man and the Martyr. An address delivered before the faculty
    and the students of Lincoln University, by John James Carter. 39
    pp. Westminster Press. Philadelphia. 1915.

---- Program of Celebration (1415-1915) by the Jan Hus Bohemian
    Presbyterian Church and Neighborhood House. 8 pp. New York. July,
    1915.

---- The Five Hundredth Anniversary Celebration of the Martyrdom of
    ----, Bohemian Reformer. 4 pp. Held at Oberlin College, Oberlin.
    Oct. 10, 1915.

Hutton, J. E. A History of the Moravian Church. 8º. 520 pp. Moravian
    Publication Office. London. 1909.

James, Henry. Sketches of Moravian Life and Character. Chapter 2, The
    Ancient Unitas Fratrum. J. B. Lippincott & Co. Philadelphia. 1859.

Kautsky, Karl. Communism in Central Europe in the time of the
    reformation. Heretical Communism: its general character. The
    Taborites. The Bohemian Brethren. Translated by J. L. and E. G.
    Mulliken. London. 1897.

Kitts, Eustace John. Pope John the Twenty-Third and Master John Hus of
    Bohemia. Illustrated. 8º. 446 pp. Constable and Co. London. 1910.

Krasinski, Count Valerian. Sketch of the religious history of the
    Slavic nations. Being a second edition of his lectures on the
    subject, revised and enlarged. 8º. 358 pp. Johnstone and Hunter.
    Edinburgh. 1851.

Kuhns, L. Oscar. John Huss: The Witness. 12º. 174 pp. Jennings &
    Graham. Cincinnati. 1907.

Latrobe, C. I. Select Narratives extracted from the History of the
    Church known by the name of Unitas Fratrum, or United Brethren....
    Chronologically arranged. Part I, containing the ancient history.
    Translated from the German. 8º. 132 pp. London. 1806.

Latrobe, Bishop James. Historical Sketch of the Church of the United
    Brethren or Moravians. 24º. 32 pp. Samuel Gibbs. Bath. 1850.

Lenfant, Jacques. The History of the Council of Constance. Translated
    from the new edition, printed at Amsterdam, which the author not
    only revised and corrected, but considerably augmented. With
    plates. 4º. 2 vs. 1376 pp. London. 1730.

Loserth, Johann. Wiclif and Hus. Translated from the German by M. J.
    Evans. 8º. 366 pp. Hodder and Stoughton. London. 1884.

Lützow, Count Francis. Article on Hussites, 11th ed. Encyclopædia
    Britannica.

---- The Life and Times of Master John Hus. Illustrated. 8º. 398 pp. J.
    M. Dent & Co. London. E. P. Dutton & Co. New York. 1909.

---- The Hussite Wars. 8º. 384 pp. 1 portrait. J. M. Dent & Sons.
    London. 1914.

McCorry, John Stewart. Four Catholic Lectures, dedicated to the Hon.
    Lord Ardmillan, in answer to the Four Protestant Lectures of the
    Rev. William Hanna, on the Dawn of the Reformation in England and
    Bohemia; in sketches of the lives of Wycliffe, Huss and Jerome of
    Prague, which were delivered in connection with the Philosophical
    Institution, February 1858. 8º. 63 pp. Marsh & Beattie. Edinburgh.
    1858.

Malin, William Gunn. History of the Bohemian Bible, with an examination
    of its claim to European priority. Appendix to Catalogue of books
    relating to or illustrating the History of the Unitas Fratrum, or
    United Brethren, pp. 135-47. Philadelphia. 1881. Same, Transactions
    of the Moravian Historical Society. Nazareth, Pa. 1:143-53. 1876.

---- Ziska. Brief notices of the career of this great captain of
    the Hussites. Appendix to Catalogue of books relating to or
    illustrating the History of the Unitas Fratrum, or United
    Brethren, pp. 133-135. Philadelphia. 1881.

Mangasarian, M. M. John Hus, the man who struck the first blow.
    A lecture delivered before the Independent Religious Society
    (Rationalist). 23 pp. Chicago. 1915.

Mears, John W. Heroes of Bohemia: Huss, Jerome and Zisca. Presbyterian
    Board of Publication. 8º. 345 pp. Philadelphia. 1879.

Moravians. Primitive Church Government, in the Practice of the
    Reformed in Bohemia, or, an Account of the Ecclesiastick Order and
    Discipline among the Reformed; or, (as they call’d themselves) the
    Unity of the Brethren in Bohemia. With same Notes of John-Amos
    Comenius, serving to illustrate the same; and a preface pointing
    out the True way to a Solid Peace, Order and Unity. And giving
    an Abstract of the History of the said Brethren, in so far as it
    relates to this account. 4º. 55 pp. Edinburgh. 1703.

---- A short View of the Continued Sufferings ... and heavy Oppressions
    of the Episcopal Reformed Churches, formerly in Bohemia and now in
    Great Poland and Polish Prussia. Printed by John Baskett ... and by
    the Assigns of Thomas Newcomb and Henry Hills, deceas’d. 4º. 4 pp.
    London. 1716.

---- The Contents of a folio History of the Moravians or United
    Brethren.... Printed in 1749 and privately sold ... under the title
    Acta Fratrum Unitatis in Anglia: with Suitable Remarks. Humbly
    addressed to the Pious of every Protestant Denomination in Europe
    and America. By a Lover of Light. (Said to be John Wesley.) By G.
    Lavington, Bishop of Exeter. 8º. 60 pp. Printed for J. Roberts.
    London. 1750.

---- A Brief History of the Protestant Episcopal Church, Known by the
    name of Unitas Fratrum, or the United Brethren. Together with the
    Reasons for and against the Privileges granted them in the British
    Dominions in the Year 1749: So as they are inserted in the Months
    of April and May of the Universal Magazine. 32 pp. Printed by S.
    Powell. Dublin. 1750.

---- Some Observations. I. On the Antiquity of the Present United
    Brethren, called Moravians. II. On some of the Extracts of their
    General Synods. III. On the Doctrine of the Trinity and Person of
    Christ. 8º. 24 pp. W. Owen. London. 1751.

---- Narrative of the Rise and Progress of the Herrnhuters, commonly
    called Moravians or Unitas Fratrum. London. 1754.

---- Compared and detected. By the author of the Enthusiasm of the
    Methodists and Papists compared. G. Lavington, Bishop of Exeter.
    8º. London. 1755. (Opponent of Moravians.)

---- Brief Narrative of the Origin and Progress of the Church of the
    United Brethren commonly called Moravians, especially as connected
    with their recognition by the Church and Government of England. No
    title page. 8º. 7 pp. London. 1820. (?)

---- Sketch of the History of the Church and Missions of the United
    Brethren. 8º. London. 1822.

---- A Concise History of the Unitas Fratrum, or Church of the United
    Brethren commonly called Moravians. 12º. 190 pp. W. Mallalieu & Co.
    London. 1862.

---- Historical Society Transactions of.... 1st v. in 1876. Nazareth,
    Pa.

---- Debate in the English Parliament on a bill to relieve the United
    Brethren, or Moravians, from military duty and taking oaths. As
    reported for the Universal Magazine. Remarks made by Lieutenant
    Gen. Oglethorpe when the Petition of the Deputies of the said
    People was brought in, Feb. 9, 1748. Printed in Catalogue of books
    relating to or illustrating the History of the Unitas Fratrum, or
    United Brethren. Pp. 148-72. Philadelphia. 1881.

Ogden, John C. An Excursion into Bethlehem and Nazareth in Pennsylvania
    in the year 1799; with a succinct history of the Society of the
    United Brethren commonly called Moravians. 12º. 167 pp. Charles
    Cist. Philadelphia. 1800.

Oldham, Samuel S. John Huss: His times, life, faith and martyrdom. A
    Lecture delivered before the Young Men’s Christian Association, at
    the Rotundo, Dublin. 8º. 47 pp. Seeley. London. 1854.

Pastor, Ludwig. The History of the Popes from the Close of the Middle
    Ages. Drawn from the secret archives of the Vatican and other
    original sources. From the German of ----. 8º. K. Paul, Trench,
    Trübner & Co. London. 1906-1912.

Pennington, Arthur Robert. Epochs of the Papacy, from its Rise to the
    Death of Pope Pius IX., in 1878. 496 pp. Hussites, p. 234. G. Bell
    & Sons. London. 1882.

Pescheck, Christian Adolf. The Reformation and Anti-reformation in
    Bohemia. From the German of ----. 2 vs. 8º. 901 pp. Houlston &
    Stoneman. London. 1845.

Prynne, William. A Seasonable Vindication of Supream Authority and
    Jurisdiction of Christian Kings, Lords, Parliaments, as well over
    the possessions, as Persons of Delinquent Prelates and Churchmen;
    or, an Antient Disputation of the famous Bohemian Martyr John Hus,
    in Justification of John Wickliff’s 17. Article. Transcribed out
    of the printed Works of John Hus, and Mr. John Fox his Acts and
    Monuments.... With an additional appendix thereunto of Proofs, and
    Domestick Presidents in all ages, usefull for present and future
    times. Printed by T. Childe and L. Parry and are to be sold by
    Edward Thomas. 4º. 118 pp. London. 1660.

Rashdall, Hastings Stanhope. John Huss. Historical Essay. 8º. 41 pp.
    Simpkin, Marshall & Co. London. 1879.

Reincke, Abraham. A register of members of the Moravian Church and of
    persons attached to said church in this country and abroad, between
    1727-1754. 144 pp. Bethlehem. 1873.

Risler, Jeremias. Select Narratives from the History of the Church
    known by the name of Unitas Fratrum or United Brethren. Translated
    from the German. Part 1, Ancient History. 8º. 132 pp. Wm. McDowell.
    London. 1806.

Rogers, Henry. The Story of John Huss. 8º. 12 pp. Reprint from Good
    Words. London.

Rolt, Richard. The Lives of the Principal Reformers. Embellished with
    the heads of the reformers in mezzotinto by Houston. fo. 202 pp. 21
    portraits. E. Bakewell and H. Parker. London. 1759.

Rundle, Charles Elizabeth. Sketches of Christian life in England in the
    olden time. Sketches of the United Brethren of Bohemia and Moravia.
    75 pp. London. 1865.

Schaff, David Schley. John Huss. His Life, Teachings and Death. After
    five hundred years. 349 pp. Charles Scribner’s Sons. New York. 1915.

Schwarze, W. N. John Hus, the Martyr of Bohemia. A Study of the Dawn of
    Protestantism. Illustrated. 8º. 152 pp. Fleming H. Revell Company.
    New York. 1915.

Schweinitz, Edmund de. The Moravian Episcopate. 8º. 28 pp. Bethlehem,
    Pa. 1865.

---- Who are the Moravians? A discourse preached at the dedication of
    the lecture room of the Second Moravian Church in Philadelphia. 8º.
    12 pp. Philadelphia. 1867.

---- A History of the Unitas Fratrum, from its overthrow in Bohemia
    and Moravia to its renewal at Herrnhut, 1627 to 1722. 8º. 16 pp.
    Bethlehem. 1877.

---- The History of the Church known as the Unitas Fratrum, or the
    Unity of the Brethren, founded by the followers of John Hus, the
    Bohemian Reformer and Martyr. 8º. 693 pp. Bethlehem. 1885.

Small, J. Some account of the original protest of the Bohemian nobles
    against the burning of John Hus. Edinburgh. 1861.

Smith, J. Milton. Stars of the Reformation; being short sketches of
    eminent reformers and of the leading events in Europe which led to
    the revival of Christianity. Bohemian Reformation, pp. 18-36. S. W.
    Partridge & Co. London.

Trench, Richard C. Bohemia and Huss. Lectures on Mediæval Church
    History. 8º. 321 pp. London. 1877.

Ullmann, C. Reformers before the Reformation, principally in Germany
    and the Netherlands, depicted by ----. Translated by Robert
    Menzies. Hussites included. 8º. 2 vs. T. & T. Clark. Edinburgh.
    1855.

Van Dyke, Paul. The Age of the Renascence. 397 pp. Charles Scribner’s
    Sons. New York. 1913.

Varillas, Antoine. The Pretended Reformers: or, a true History of the
    German Reformation, founded upon the heresie of John Wickliffe,
    John Huss and Jerom of Prague; and an impartial account of the
    wars, which ensued thereupon. Made English from the French
    original, by Matthias Earbery. 8º. 93 pp. Printed for T. Jauncy.
    London. 1720.

Whately, Jane E. The Gospel in Bohemia. Sketches of Bohemian Religious
    History. 8º. 190 pp. The Religious Tract Society. London. 1876.

Williams, Robert F. Lives of the English Cardinals. English Opinion in
    Bohemia, pp. 33-58. William H. Allen & Co. London. 1868.

[Illustration:

                             THE GATE
                            OF TONGVES
                           VNLOCKED AND
                              OPENED,
                             Or else,
                   A Seminarie or seed-plot of all
                       Tongues and Sciences.

                            _That is_:
        A short way of teaching and thorowly learning within 1
        yeere and a halfe as the farthest, the Latin, English,
        French, and any other tongue, together with the ground
           and foundation of Arts and Sciences, comprised
                  under an hundred Titles, and a
                          1058. Periods.

                        _In Latine first_:
         And now as a token of thankfulnesse brought to light
          in Latine, English, and French, In the behalfe of
            the most Illustrious Prince CHARLES, and of
                       British, French and Irish
                               Youth.

               The Second Edition, much enlarged.

         _By the labour and industry of_ IOHN ANCHORAN,
                     Licentiate in Divinity.

                             _LONDON_,
       Printed by _Tho. Cotes_, for _Thomas Slater_, dwelling
               at the White Swan, in duck-Lane. 1633.

Komenský’s The Gate of Tongues Unlocked]

Worthington, John. The Diary and Correspondence of ---- United Brethren
    and Moravians in, v. 1, pp. 164, 211, 238, 241, 260, 269, 291, 299,
    316, 318; account of the life of the United Brethren exiled in
    Hungary, by Figulus (Komenský’s son-in-law), pp. 153-56.

Workman, Herbert B. The Dawn of the Reformation. v. 1, The Age of
    Wiclif; v. 2, The age of Hus. 8º. 374 pp. Charles H. Kelly. London.
    1901.

Wratislaw, A. H. John Huss and the Ultramontanes. 8º. 22 pp. Reprint
    from the Contemporary Review. London. 1872.

---- John Huss. The Commencement of Resistance to Papal Authority on
    the Part of the Inferior Clergy. Society for Promoting Christian
    Knowledge. 12º. 408 pp. London. 1882.

Wyatt, Margaret Anne, translator. A Memoir; illustrating some of the
    workings of Popery in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.
    Translated from the German. With an introductory note on Popery,
    by a Beneficed Clergyman of the Anglican Church. 8º. 136 pp. L. B.
    Seely and W. Burnside. London. 1841.

Wylie, James Hamilton. The Council of Constance to the Death of John
    Hus. 12º. 192 pp. 3 plates. Being the Ford Lectures delivered in
    the University of Oxford. Longmans, Green & Co. London. 1900.


ARTICLES

Anketell, John. The History of the Church in Bohemia and Moravia. The
    American Church Review. New York. 29:357-87; 29:557-91, 1877.
    30:41-63; 30:245-61; 30:376-90; 30:601-15, 1878. 31:35-42;
    31:91-101; 31:201-10, 1879.

Baker, James. Sion-Bohemia. Morning Post. London. June 1, 1892.

Banks, J. S. The Story of Jan Hus. Wesleyan Methodist Magazine. London.
    117:245-50; 353-57. 1894.

Behringer, G. F. John Huss. Lutheran Quarterly Review. Gettysburg.
    22:223-37. April, 1892.

Blaikie, W. G. The Bohemian Centenary. The Catholic Presbyterian.
    London. 3:241-50. Oct., 1881.

---- The Bohemian and Moravian Centenary. Postscript. The Catholic
    Presbyterian. London. 3:240. 1881.

Bohemia: How it became Romanist. Christian Observer. London. 71:91.

---- Protestant clergy in ----. Kitto’s Journal of Sacred Literature.
    London. 30:282.

---- Counter-Reformation in ----. Christian Remembrancer. London.
    53:271-89. April, 1867. London Times military correspondent at the
    seat of war.

---- Reconquered, in 1620-28. The Congregationalist. London. 4:615-19.
    1875.

---- Commemoration. The Catholic Presbyterian. London. 3:70. 1881.

Brown, D. John Hus and Wicklif. British and Foreign Evangelical Review.
    London. 33:572-78. July, 1884; Spectator. London. 57:851-52. 1884;
    Athenæum. London. 1:625. 1884. Review of Johann Loserth’s Wickliff
    and Hus.

Císař, F. Los von Rom. The Presbyterian and Reformed Review.
    Philadelphia. 12:660-66. 1901. Translated from the author’s MSS.
    by Václav Losa and Charles E. Edwards.

Cramer, M. J. John Huss; Letters to his Church in Prague. Christian
    Literature. New York. 13:179-85. Aug., 1895.

Crawford, W. H. John Hus and the present demand for home rule in
    Bohemia. The Methodist Review. New York. 58:681-95. 1898.

Dušek, V. Early Struggles in the Bohemian Church. The Catholic
    Presbyterian. London. 3:356-66. May, 1880.

---- Bohemia after the Death of John Hus. The Catholic Presbyterian.
    London. 4:132-40. Aug., 1880.

---- Bohemia during the Reformation. The Catholic Presbyterian. London.
    5:361. May, 1881.

Felts, P. Jerome of Prague. The Lutheran Quarterly. Gettysburg.
    26:380-93. 1896.

Giddins, George H. John Hus; the Preacher of Prague. The Methodist
    Review. New York. 12:569-75; 669-74; 753-59; 830-37; 916-22. 1899.

Gillett, E. H. The Taborites and the Germ of the Moravian Church. The
    American Presbyterian Review. New York. 13:391-410. July, 1864.

---- The Sermons of John Huss. The New Englander. New Haven. Oct., 1864.

Good, James I. John Huss and the Reformed Church. The Reformed Church
    Review. Lancaster, Pa. 19:161-71. 1915.

Hallivell, George W. The Oldest Protestant Denomination. The Sunday
    School Times. Philadelphia. 40:523-24. 1898.

Hark, J. Max. History of the Church of the Moravians. Andover Review.
    Boston. 4:587-93. Dec., 1885. Review of De Schweinitz’s Unitas
    Fratrum.

Hus, John. Our John Hus Celebration. Jubilee number of the Radost,
    published by the John Hus Bohemian Presbyterian Church. New York.
    July, 1915.

---- Five Hundredth Anniversary of the Death of ----, by Herbert B.
    Workman. Quarterly Review. London. 124:145-49. July, 1915.

---- His Message to the Preachers of To-day. Portrait. By Count Lützow.
    Homiletic Review. New York. 70:3-9. July, 1915.

---- The Life and Work of ----. An address delivered April 1, 1915,
    in honor of the five hundredth anniversary of the martyrdom of
    ----, by Remsen du Bois Bird. The Princeton Theological Review.
    Princeton. 13:256-74. 1915.

---- The Outlook. New York. 110:545-47. July 7; 110:594. July 14, 1915.

---- His Work, Trial and Martyrdom. Spectator. London. 115:10-12. July
    3, 1915.

---- Five Hundredth Anniversary. By Father Sebastian. Supplement to the
    Herald of the Serbian Church, San Francisco. 1915.

---- Quincentenary of ... Nation. New York. 101:73-5. July 8, 1915.

---- and the Hussites. The Treasury. New York. 17:335-45. 1899-1900.

---- and the Hussites. United States Catholic Magazine. Baltimore.
    4:409.

---- Jerome of Prague. Methodist Magazine. London. 45:508.

Jewett, J. L. Life and Times of John Huss. Methodist Quarterly. London.
    3:220.

Miškovský, Louis Francis. The Catholic Counter-Reformation in Bohemia.
    Bibliotheca Sacra. Oberlin. July, 1900.

---- The Unitas Fratrum. Bibliotheca Sacra. Oberlin. July, 1908.

The Moravians. The American Quarterly Church Review. New Haven.
    13:80-97. 1861.

---- Antecedents of ----. The American Presbyterian Review. New York.
    7:77.

---- History of ----. Southern Review. St. Louis. 10:189-215. Jan.,
    1872.

Neisser, George. A List of Bohemian and Moravian Emigrants to Saxony.
    Collected from various sources in print and manuscripts; begun and
    completed at New York from June 2, to July 20, 1772. Translated and
    edited by Albert G. Rau. Transactions of the Moravian Historical
    Society. 9:41-93. Bethlehem Times Pub. Society. 1913.

Piper, C. R. Protestantism of John Huss. Portrait. Open Court. Chicago.
    29:321-31. June, 1915.

Rogers, Henry. The Story of John Huss. Good Words. London. 7:21-30.
    Jan., 1866; same, Living Age. Boston. 88:341-52. Feb., 1866.

Schaff, David S. A Spurious account of Huss’s Journey to Constance,
    Trial, and Death. An exposure of a book in German, published in St.
    Louis, 1875, on the Infallibility of the Pope, etc. With note by
    Preserved Smith. The American Journal of Theology. Chicago. 276-82.
    April, 1915.

Sherwood, J. M. Comment on Gillett’s Life and Times of John Hus.
    Reformation in Bohemia. The American Presbyterian Review. New
    York. 13:114-36. Jan., 1864; same, The Biblical Review. London.
    1:123. 1864.

Smyth, J. J. Life and Times of John Huss. Evangelical Review. London.
    18:473.

Spalding, M. J. John Huss and the Hussites. Miscellanea. London. 1855.

Stevenson, W. F. How John Hus became a saint in the Romish Calendar.
    Month. London. 15:425; same, Good Words. London. 4:339-44. 1863.

The Taborites and the Calixtines. The American Presbyterian Review. New
    York. 5:1.

Thurston, Herbert. John Huss. Month. London. 156-64. Aug., 1915.

Torry, H. W. Life and Letters of John Huss. The North American
    Review. Boston and New York. 65:265-305. Oct., 1847. Review of de
    Bonnechose’s The Reformers before the Reformation and of Letters of
    John Huss written during his exile and imprisonment.

Vojan, J. E. S. Bohemian-American Freethinkers and John Huss. English
    Section of the Orgán Bratrstva Č. S. P. S. 23:223. Chicago. 1915.

Wratislaw, A. H. Protestants of Bohemia. Good Words. London. 3:607-8.
    1862.

---- An Account of the Writings of John Huss, in the Czeskish or
    Bohemian language (including his letters from Constance), most
    of them now printed for the first time. Review of the collected
    Bohemian writings of Magister John Huss by Karel Jaromír Erben.
    The Contemporary Review. London. 10:530-55. 1869; same, Kitto’s
    Journal of Sacred Literature. London. 40:97; same, The American
    Presbyterian Review. New York. 5:228.

---- Precursors of John Huss in Bohemia. The Contemporary Review.
    London. 13:196-210. 1870.

---- John Huss and the Ultramontanes. The Contemporary Review. London.
    19:238-59. 1872; same, Living Age. Boston. 112:427-39. Feb., 1872.

Žižka, John, the Bohemian Patriot. Leisure Hour. London. 10:263-67.
    1861.

---- and the Reformation in Bohemia. Macmillan’s Magazine. London.
    72:346-55. Sept., 1895; same, Living Age. Boston. 207-297. 1895.




XIII

JOHN AMOS KOMENSKÝ

(Comenius)


PUBLICATIONS

Bristol, Frank M. John Amos Comenius. Lecture delivered March 29, 1892.
    Fleming H. Revell Company. New York. 1892.

Butler, Nicholas Murray. Place of Comenius in the History of Education.
    20 pp. C. W. Bardeen. Syracuse, 1892.

Compayré, Gabriel. The History of Pedagogy. Translated by W. H. Payne.
    Comenius, pp. 122-37. D. C. Heath & Co. Boston. 1907.

Field, E. M. The Child and His Book. Gardner, Darton & Co. London. 1891.

Graves, Frank Pierrepont. A History of Education in Modern Times.
    Comenius, pp. 271-91. The Macmillan Company. New York. 1914.

Hanus, Paul H. Educational Aims and Educational Values. Comenius, pp.
    193-211. The Macmillan Company. New York. 1899.

Hark, J. M. The Private Life and Personal Characteristics of John
    Amos Comenius, pp. 196-204 of Proceedings of the Department of
    Superintendence of the National Educational Association for 1892.
    C. W. Bardeen. Syracuse. 1892.

Hoyt, Charles Oliver. Studies in the History of Modern Education.
    Comenius and Realism in Education, pp. 21-48. Bibliography, p. 27.
    Silver, Burdette & Co. Boston. 1908.

Kiddle, Henry and Schem, A. J. The Cyclopædia of Education. Comenius,
    pp. 159-61. E. Steiger & Co. New York. 1883.

Komenský, John Amos. Janua Linguarum Reserata. The Gate of Tongues
    Vnlocked and opened, or else, A Seminarie or Seed-plot of all
    Tongues and Sciences.... In Latine first; and now as a token of
    thankfulnesse brought to light in Latine, English, and French. In
    the behalfe of the most illustrious Prince Charles, and of the
    British, French and Irish youth. The second Edition, much enlarged.
    By the labour and industry Iohn Anchoran, Licentiate in Divinity.
    Printed by Tho. Cotes, for Thomas Slater, dwelling at the White
    Swan, in Duck-Lane. London. 1633.

---- The School of Infancy. An essay on the Education of Youth during
    the first six years. 76 pp. To which is prefixed a Sketch of the
    Life of the Author by ... David Benham. 176 pp. W. Mallalieu & Co.
    London. 1858. Another edition by D. C. Heath & Co., Boston, 1896,
    edited with notes and introduction by Will S. Monroe. First English
    ed. 1641.

---- A Reformation of Schooles, Designed in two excellent Treatises:
    the first whereof Summarily sheweth the great necessity of a
    generall Reformation of Common Learning. What grounds of Hope
    there are for such a Reformation. How it may be brought to passe.
    The second answers certaine objections ordinarily made against such
    undertakings and describes the severall Partes and Titles of Workes
    which are shortly to follow. Written many yeares agoe in Latine
    by that Reverend, Godly, Learned, and famous Divine Mr. John Amos
    Comenius, one of the Seniours of the exiled Church of Moravians.
    And now upon the request of many translated into English, and
    published by Samuel Hartlib, for the generall good of this Nation.
    4º. 94 pp. Printed for Michael Sparke, Senior, at the Blew Bible in
    Greene Arbor. London. 1642.

---- His Last Porch of the Latin Tongue: Setting out the agreement of
    Things and Language (made fit unto the Rules of the last Method
    of Languages) made English, according to the Copy thereof, turned
    into Low-Dutch by Henry Schoof and carefully compared with the
    Original. Also so fitted with a Vestibulary Grammar, and an English
    Table, that hence the Latin Tongue may be perfectly well learned
    in a short time: By J. Brookbank. 8º. 221 pp. Printed by R.
    Hodgkinsonne. London. 1647.

[Illustration:

                                THE
                              HISTORY
                               Of the
                        Bohemian Persecution,

                    From the beginning of their
               conversion to Christianity in the year
                       894. to the year 1632.

             _Ferdinand_ the 2. of _Austria_, Reigning.

             In which the unheard of secrets of policy,
              Counsells, Arts and dreadfull Judgements
                           are exhibited.

                           [Illustration]

                              _LONDON_
         Printed by _B. A._ for _Iohn Walker_ at the Star in
                        Popes-Head-Ally MDCL,

Komenský’s History of the Bohemian Persecution]

---- A Continuation of his School Endeavours. Or a Summary Delineation
    of Dr. Cyprian Kinner Silesian. His thoughts concerning Education:
    or the Way and Method of Teaching. Exposed to the ingeneous and
    free Censure of all Piously-learned men The which shal shortly
    be seconded with an Elucidarium or Commentary to open the sense
    of whatsoever is herein contained, chiefly of what is paradoxall
    and obscure, (if any such shall appear to be). Together with an
    advice of how these thoughts may be successfully put in practice.
    Translated out of the Original Latine, transmitted to Sam. Hartlib
    and by him published and in the name of very Godly and Learned Men,
    recommended to the serious Consideration, and Liberall Assistance,
    of such, as are willing to favour the Reformation of all Christian
    Churches and Commonwealths: but more especially the Good and
    Happiness of these United Kingdoms. Published by Authority. 4º.
    Printed for R. L. London. 1648.

---- The History of the Bohemian Persecution, From the beginning of
    their conversion to Christianity in the year 894 to the year 1632.
    Ferdinand the 2nd of Austria, Reigning. In Which the unheard of
    secrets of policy, Counsells, Arts, and dreadfull Judgements are
    exhibited. 12º. 284 pp. Printed by B. A. for John Walker at the
    Star in Popes-Head-Ally. 1650.

---- Pansophiæ diatyposis. A Patterne of Universall Knowledge, in
    a plaine and true Draught; or, A Diatyposis, or Model of the
    Eminently Learned and Pious Promotor of Science in generall, Mr.
    John Amos Comenius. Shadowing forth the largenesse, dimension,
    and use of the intended Worke, in an Ichnographicall and
    Orthographicall Delineation. Translated into English by Jeremy
    Collier. 8º. 180 pp. Printed by T. H., and are to be sold by Thomas
    Collins, Bookseller in Northampton. 1651.

---- Naturall Philosophie Reformed by Divine Light; or, a Synopsis
    of Physicks. Exposed to the censure of those that are Lovers of
    Learning, and desire to be taught of God. Being a view of the World
    in generall and of the particular creatures therein contained;
    grounded upon Scripture Principles. With a briefe Appendix touching
    the Diseases of the Body, Mind, and Soul; with their generall
    Remedies. 8º. 256 pp. Printed by Robert and William Leybourn, for
    Thomas Pierrepont, at the Sun in Pauls Church-yard. 1651.

---- Revelation Revealed by two Apocalyptical Treatises, translated out
    of the High Dutch, with a Dedication to Oliver St. John by Sam.
    Hartlib, and a long Discourse by John Durie. London. 1651.

---- The True and Readie Way to Learne the Latine Tongue. Attested by
    Three Excellently Learned and Approved Authours of three Nations.
    By Samuel Hartlib, London. Printed by R. and W. Leybourn for the
    Common-wealth of Learning. London. 1654.

---- The Gate of the Latine Tongue Unlocked. Exhibiting in a natural
    order the structure of Things and of the Latine Tongue (according
    to the Rules of the newest Method of Tongues). With an etymological
    Index of the words, gathered out of the Janual Lexicon, Varro,
    Scaliger, Isidore, Martinus and other Classical Autors, and
    Alphabetically disposed by W. D. 8º. 332 pp. Printed by William
    Du-Gard; and are to be sold by John Clark at the entrance into
    Mercer’s Chappel, at the lower end of Cheapside. A. Dom. 1656.

---- Orbis Sensvalivm Pictus (Visible World), or, A Picture and
    Nomenclature of all the chief Things that are in the World, and
    of Mens employments therein. A Work newly written by the Author
    in Latine, and High-Dutch (being one of his last Essays, and the
    most suitable to Childrens Capacities of any that he hath hitherto
    made) & translated into English. By Charles Hoole, Teacher of a
    Private Grammar-School in Lothbury. London. For the use of young
    Latine-Scholars. With portrait of Komenský. 8º. 309 pp. Printed for
    J. Kirton, at the Kings-Arms, in Saint Paules Church-yard. 1659.

---- An Exhortation of the Churches of Bohemia to the Church of
    England: Wherein is set forth the Good of Unity, Order, Discipline
    and Obedience, in Churches rightly now, or to be Constituted.
    With a Description premised of the Order and Discipline us’d in
    the Churches of the Brethren in Bohemia. Written in Latine and
    dedicated to his most Excellent Majesty Charls the Second, in
    Holland, at his Returning into England; if possible it may be
    for an Accomodation amongst the Churches of Christ. By J. Amos
    Comenius, the only surviving Bishop of the Remains of those
    Churches. 4º. 78 pp. Translated by Joshua Tymarchus. Printed for
    Thomas Parkhurst, at the Three Crowns, over-against the great
    conduity at the lower end of Cheapside. 1661.[15]

  [15] On p. 447 of his _Písemnictví České_ (Bohemian Literature), Dr.
  Flajšhans asserts that Komenský wrote in 1660 a Latin treatise on the
  Unity of the Brethren, entitled _De Bono Unitatis_, etc., which he
  dedicated to Charles II. Obviously the treatise referred to by Flajšhans
  and the _Exhortation of the Churches of Bohemia to the Church of England_
  is one and the same.

---- A General Table of Europe, representing the Present and Future
    State thereof: The Present: Governments, Languages, Religions,
    Foundations and Revolutions both of Governments and Religions.
    The Future: Mutations, Revolutions, Government and Religion
    of Christendom, and of the World. From the Prophecies of the
    three late German Prophets, Kotterus, Christina (Poniatovská)
    and Drabicius, etc. All Collected out of the Originals, for the
    common Use and Information of the English. 4º. 288 pp. Benjamin
    Billingsley. London. 1670.

---- Janua Linguarum. Translated into English, and printed according
    to J. A. Comenius his last Edition, delivered with his own Hand.
    So much altered, augmented, and amended, that it may be accounted
    as a new Work. 8º. 285 pp. Illustrated. Printed by John Redmayne.
    London. 1670.

---- Ratio Disciplinæ, or the Constitution of the Congregational
    Churches. By T. C. Upham on the model of K’s and Mather’s books.
    Portland, Maine. 1829.

---- Rules of Life. Regulæ vitæ. 19 pp. W. Mallalieu & Co. London. 1865.

---- The Great Didactic. Now for the first time Englished, with
    introduction, biographical and historical, by M. W. Keatinge. 319
    pp. Adam and Charles Black. London. 1896.

---- The Labyrinth of the World and the Paradise of the Heart. Edited
    and Englished by the Count Lützow. 16º. 2 pl. 306 pp. 1 portrait.
    The Temple Classics. J. M. Dent & Co. London. 1905.

Kvačala, John, editor. Korrespondence Jana Amose Komenského. Collection
    of Latin, Bohemian, English and German letters written by or
    concerning Komenský. Three volumes, two edited by John Kvačala and
    one by A. Patera. Published by the Francis Joseph Bohemian Academy
    of Sciences, Letters and Arts. Prague. 1892, 1898, 1902.

Lang, Ossian H. Comenius: His Life and Principles of Education. E. L.
    Kellogg & Co. New York. 1891.

Laurie, S. S. John Amos Comenius, Bishop of the Moravians; His Life
    and Educational Works. Reading circle edition; with five authentic
    portraits and a new bibliography with fifteen photographic
    reproductions from early editions of his works. 272 pp. C. W.
    Bardeen. Syracuse. 1892.

---- Studies in the History of Education. Comenius, pp. 138-58.
    University Press. Cambridge. 1903.

Maxwell, W. H. The Text-Books of Comenius ... address before the
    Department of Superintendence of the National Educational
    Association at Brooklyn. 24 pp. C. W. Bardeen. Syracuse. 1892.

Monroe, Paul, editor. A Cyclopædia of Education. Comenius, v. 2, pp.
    135-41. The Macmillan Company. New York. 1911.

Monroe, Will S. Comenius, the Evangelist of Modern Pedagogy. 7 pp.
    Reprint from Education. Boston. Dec., 1892.

---- Comenius and the Beginnings of Educational Reform. 8º. 184 pp.
    Charles Scribner’s Sons. New York. 1907.

Munroe, James P. The Educational Ideal. Comenius, pp. 68-94. D. C.
    Heath & Co. Boston. 1896.

Painter, F. V. N. A History of Education. Comenius, pp. 200-12. D.
    Appleton & Co. New York. 1891.

---- Great Pedagogical Essays. John Amos Comenius; selections from his
    Great Didactic, with biographical sketch. American Book Company.
    New York. 1905.

Parker, Samuel Chester. A Text-book in the History of Modern Elementary
    Education. 12º. 505 pp. Illustrated. Comenius, pp. 136-48.
    Bibliography. Ginn and Company. Boston. 1912.

Paterson, Maurice. Johann Amos Comenius. A sketch of his life and
    educational ideas. 8º. 48 pp. Blackie & Son. London. 1892.

Payne, Joseph. Lectures on the History of Education. London. 1892.

Payne, W. H. A Short History of Education. Bibliography of Comenius.
    Pp. 100-04. C. W. Bardeen. Syracuse. 1881.

Quick, Robert Herbert. Essays on Educational Reformers. Comenius, pp.
    119-71. D. Appleton & Co. New York. 1902.

Sloane Manuscripts, in the British Museum. By J. L. Scott. London.
    1904. Letters to and from J. Hübner, between 1638-40, alluding to
    Komenský. Pp. 1-66-98-123, 152-200.

Vaughn, Robert. The Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell and the state
    of Europe during the early part of the reign of Louis XIV.
    Letters written by Samuel Hartlib relating to Komenský, pp.
    430-31-32-37-44-47. 2 vs. Henry Colburn. London. 1838.

Williams, Samuel Gardiner. The History of Modern Education. 16º. 481
    pp. Comenius, pp. 163-86. C. W. Bardeen. Syracuse. 1899.

The World’s Best Essays, from the earliest period to the present time;
    edited by David Brewer. Comenius, pp. 1122-28. Fred P. Kaiser. St.
    Louis. 1900.

Worthington, John. The Diary and Correspondence of ----. From the Baker
    MS. in the British Museum and the Cambridge University Library and
    other sources. 2 vs. Edited by James Crossley. Printed for the
    Chetham Society. 1847. Copious references to Komenský.[16]

  [16] On pp. 78-9, v. 2, part 1, is a poem by James Montgomery, reprinted
  from his _Greenland_, edit. 1850, pp. 73-4, which pictures Komenský
  leading out the remnant of the United Brethren from the land of their
  sires.

ARTICLES

Blodgett, J. H. Was Comenius called to the Presidency of Harvard?
    Educational Review. New York. 16:391-93. 1898.

Busse, F. Object Teaching. American Journal of Education. Hartford.
    30:417-30. 1880.

Calkins, N. A. The History of Object Teaching. American Journal of
    Education. Hartford. 12:633-45. 1862.

Eaton, John. Comenius. The Philadelphia Sunday School Times. 39:562-63.
    1897.

Fisher, Philip Melanchton. Celebration of the 300th Anniversary of the
    Birth of Comenius, at Pasadena, California. Pacific Educational
    Monthly. 8:147-50. 1892.

Gregor, Frances. A Pioneer of Learning. The Chicago Times. Mar. 26,
    1892.

Klosé, Edwin G. John Amos Comenius: His Life, Services to the
    Brethren’s Church and to Education. The Moravian. Bethlehem. Mar.
    9, 16, 23, 1892.

Komenský, John Amos. On the occasion of the three hundredth anniversary
    of the birth of ---- the Educational Review, New York, Mar.,
    1892, printed four papers: 1. John Amos Comenius, by the editor,
    Nicholas Murray Butler. 2. The Place of Comenius in the History of
    Education, by S. S. Laurie. 3. The Text Books of Comenius, by C. W.
    Bardeen. 4. The Permanent Influence of Comenius, by Paul H. Hanus.

---- the Encyclopædist and Founder of Method. Journal of Education.
    London. Mar. 1, 1892.

---- Labyrinth of the World. Review in Athenæum. London. 2:343. Sept.,
    1901; same, Nation. New York. 74:138. Feb., 1902.

---- Orbis Sensualium Pictus. American Journal of Education. Hartford.
    12:647-50. 1862; 28:859-60. 1878.

---- Writes a Letter, June, 1644. Educational Review. New York. Pp.
    487-94. Dec., 1917.

Král, J. J. (J. G. Krall.) Comenius and His Views of the Drama. The
    Theatre. London. 19:195-96. April, 1892.

Law, Mary E. Comenius or Komenský. Kindergarten Primary Magazine.
    Manistee. 27:66. Oct., 1914.

Lippert, Emanuel. Child Study in Bohemia and Moravia and Report of
    the Bohemian National Committee for the Protection of Children.
    Pedagogical Seminary. V. 4. Worcester. 1916.

Monroe, Will S. Comenius, the Evangelist of Modern Pedagogy. Education.
    Boston. 13:212. 1892.

---- At Comenius’ Grave (Naarden, Holland). Journal of Education.
    Boston. Nov. 15, 1894.

---- Was Comenius called to the Presidency of Harvard? Educational
    Review. New York. 12:378-82. 1896.

---- Comenius and the Beginnings of Educational Reform. Review by P.
    Monroe. Educational Review. New York. 20:525-26. Dec., 1900.

Quick, Robert Herbert. John Amos Comenius; his life and educational
    works. Academy. London. 21:57-8. 1882.

Raven, J. H. Comenius. An Old School Book. Living Age. Boston.
    169:373-80. 1886; same, Macmillan’s Magazine. London. 53:437-44.
    1886.

Raumer, Karl von. John Amos Comenius. American Journal of Education.
    Hartford. 5:257-98. 1858; same, Chamber’s Journal. Edinburgh.
    11:249-52. 1848.

Vojan, J. E. S. John Amos Comenius, Bohemian, not German savant. The
    Iowa Citizen. July 11, 1910.

Vostrovský, Clara. A European School of the Time of Comenius.
    Education. Boston. 17:356-59. Feb., 1897.

Watson, Foster. Comenius. Academy. London. 43:149-50. 1893.




XIV

LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE


PUBLICATIONS

Bain, Robert Nisbet. National influences in Bohemian and Polish
    Literature. The Cambridge Modern History. 11:653-60. Bibliography,
    p. 922. Cambridge. 1908.

Biographical Dictionary of the Library of the World’s Best Literature,
    Ancient and Modern. Charles Dudley Warner, editor. 31 vs. Contains
    among others, biographical notices of these Bohemian authors:
    Emanuel Bozděch, Svatopluk Čech, František Lad. Čelakovský, John
    Amos Komenský (Comenius), Josef Dobrovský, Josef Václav Frič,
    Vítězslav Hálek, Karel Havlíček (Borovský), Boleslav Jablonský
    (Karel Eugen Tupý), Bohumil Janda, Alois Jirásek, Jaroslav
    Kalina, Josef Kalousek, Josef Vlastimil Kamaryt, Václav Kliment
    Klicpera, Josef Jiří Kolár, Jan Kollár, Karel Hynek Mácha,
    Ferdinand Břetislav Mikovec, Otakar Mokrý, Božena Němcová, Jan
    Neruda, František Palacký, Pavel Josef Šafařík, Julius Zeyer. The
    International Society. New York. 1896.

[Illustration: Augustine Herrman and his Map of Virginia and Maryland.
Portrait by Himself

Herrman is the first known Bohemian immigrant to America]

Bohemian Classics. School edition. Readers for the teaching of the
    Bohemian language in American High Schools, Colleges, etc. V. 1.
    Tale by A. V. Šmilovský; v. 2. Bohemian Folk-lore. Bohemian text;
    English introduction. Arranged by J. V. Nigrin. Bohemian Literary
    Society of Chicago. 1916.

Botta, Anne C. Lynch. Handbook of Universal Literature, from the best
    and latest authorities. The Bohemian Language and Literature, pp.
    373-75. Houghton Mifflin Company. Boston. 1883.

Bowring, Sir John. (Wýbor z básnictwí českého.) Cheskian Anthology.
    Being a history of the Poetical Literature of Bohemia, with
    translated specimens. 16º. 270 pp. Rowland Hunter. St. Paul’s
    Church-Yard. London. 1832.

---- Manuscript of the Queen’s Court. A collection of old Bohemian
    lyrico-epic songs, with other ancient Bohemian poems. Translated.
    12º. London. 1843.

Havlíček, Karel. Gleanings of Epigrams of ----, translated by Jaroslav
    J. Zmrhal. English-Bohemian Memorial, published on the occasion of
    the unveiling of a monument to ---- in Chicago, July 30, 1911.

Kopta, Flora P. Bohemian Legends and other Poems. 8º. 183 pp. William
    R. Jenkins. New York. 1896.

Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth, editor. Poems of Places. Switzerland and
    Austria. Moldava, the river, by James Gates Percival, p. 227; The
    Student of Prague, by Karl Immermann, translated by J. C. Mangan,
    pp. 230-33; Battle of Prague, translated by H. W. Dulken, p. 234;
    The Old Clock of Prague, by Josiah Gilbert Holland, pp. 236-38; The
    Beleaguered City, by H. W. Longfellow, pp. 238-40; On the River
    Tepl, Bohemia, by R. E. Egerton-Warburton, p. 248; J. R. Osgood &
    Co. Boston. 1877.

Lützow, Count. A History of Bohemian Literature. 8º. 425 pp. D.
    Appleton & Company. New York. 1899.

Machar, J. S. Magdalen. Authorized translation, by Leo Wiener. 257 pp.
    Mitchell Kennerley. New York. 1916.

Morfill, Richard William. The Dawn of European Literature. Slavonic
    Literature. 16º. 264 pp. Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.
    London. 1883.

Selver, P. An Anthology of Modern Bohemian Poetry. 12º. 128 pp. Henry
    J. Drane. London. 1912.

Sonnenschein, W. S. Best Books. Slavonic Philology and Literature, p.
    638. London. 1887.

Talvj (pseud. of Theresa Alberta Louisa von Jacobi, Mrs. Robinson).
    Historical View of the Languages and Literature of the Slavic
    Nations; with a sketch of their popular poetry. Preface by Edward
    Robinson. History of the Czekhish or Bohemian language and
    literature, pp. 147-211. 8º. 412 pp. G. P. Putnam. New York. 1850.

Vickers, Robert H. Martyrdoms of Literature. 8º. 456 pp. Sassawa, pp.
    70-73; John Hus, pp. 120-22; Bohemia, Ferdinand I., pp. 203-12;
    Bohemia, Ferdinand II., pp. 295-313. Charles H. Sergel & Co.
    Chicago. 1891.

Wratislaw, A. H. (Lyra Čzecho-Slowanská.) Bohemian Poems, Ancient and
    Modern; translated from the original Slavonic, with an introductory
    essay. 16º. 120 pp. John W. Parker. London. 1849.

---- Patriotism: an ancient lyrico-epic poem, translated from the
    original Slavonic (Bohemian), with introduction. 8º. 20 pp.
    Whittaker and Co. London. 1851.

---- Manuscript of the Queen’s Court. A collection of old Bohemian
    lyrico-epic songs, with other ancient Bohemian poems. Translated.
    Polyglotta Králodvorského Rukopisu. F. Řivnáč. Prague. 1876.

---- The Native Literature of Bohemia in the Fourteenth Century. Four
    lectures delivered before the University of Oxford on the Ilchester
    Foundation. 8º. 174 pp. Geo. Bell & Sons. London. 1878.


ARTICLES

Bohemian National Hymn (Kde domov můj.) Translated. Chicago University
    Settlement Song Book; same, Charities. New York. 13:205. 1904.

Bowring, Sir John. History of Bohemian Literature. Review of Joseph
    Jungmann’s Historie literatury České. Foreign Quarterly Review.
    London. 2:146-48-74. 1828.

---- Ancient Bohemian Ballads. Westminster Review. London. 12:304-21.
    Apr., 1830. Commentary on the Queen’s Court MS.; a collection of
    old Bohemian Lyrico-Epic Songs, with other ancient Bohemian poems.
    Discovered and published by Wenceslaus Hanka and translated by
    Wenceslaus Aloys Swoboda.

Bohemian and Slovak Literature. History of ----. 31 pp. Westminster
    Review. London. 112:413. 1879.

Blind, K. Vicissitudes and Literature of Bohemia. National Quarterly
    Review. New York. 24:1. 1871.

Čapek, Thomas. Revival of the Bohemian Language. The Bohemian Voice.
    Omaha. Oct., 1892.

---- Hapsburgs and the Bohemian Language. The Bohemian Voice. Omaha.
    June, 1893.

---- The Decline and Rise of Bohemian Letters. The Bohemian Voice.
    Omaha. Sept. and Oct., 1893.

Čech, Svatopluk. Songs of the Slave. Third Song, translated by Jan
    Havlasa. Osvěta Americká. Omaha. Aug. 5, 1908.

---- Songs of the slave. Translated by Otto Kotouč. Komenský, Organ of
    the Federation of Komenský Educational Clubs. Omaha. 4:1. 1912;
    4:481-82; other Songs in Poet Lore. Boston. 27:114-16. 1916.

Čermák, B. Bohemian Literature. Athenæum. London. 2:8; 1888-89. 2:9;
    1889-90. 2:10; 1890-91.

Fairfield, A. R. Slavonic Literature. Academy. London. 24:344. 1883.
    Review of R. W. Morfill’s Slavonic Literature.

Farnham, Amos W. Bohemia, Bohemia. A poem adapted to the music of
    Maryland, My Maryland. Oswego Daily Times. Sept. 27, 1916.

Gregor, Frances. Bohemian Novelists. The Bohemian Voice. Omaha. Sept.
    and Oct., 1892.

Gurowski, A. de. Slavic Languages and Literatures. North American
    Review. Boston and New York. 71:329-59. 1850. Review of Talvj’s
    Historical View of the Languages and Literature of the Slavic
    Nations.

Hálek, Vítězslav. Evening Songs. Translated by Libbie A. Breuer.
    University of Texas Magazine. Austin. Jan., 1911. Feb., 1912.

---- Evening Songs. Translated by Otto Kotouč. Poet Lore. Boston.
    27:716-18. 1916.

Literature of Bohemia. Westminster Review. London. 116:372-91. 1881.

Lützow, Count. Ancient Bohemian Poetry. New Review. London. 16:181.
    1897.

---- The Literature of Bohemia. Transactions of the Royal Society of
    Literature. 21:207-22. London. 1900.

Machar, J. S. The Passing of Satan. A poem. Translated by J. J. Král.
    The Truth Seeker. New York. Mar., 1901.

---- A Fantastic Ballad. Translated by Otto Kotouč. Komenský, Organ of
    the Federation of Komenský Educational Clubs. Omaha. 2:2. 1910.

---- On Golgotha. Translated by Otto Kotouč. Poet Lore. Boston.
    28:485-87. 1917.

Marchant, Francis P. An Outline of Bohemian Literature. The
    Anglo-Russian Literary Society. The Imperial Institute. London. Pp.
    48-75. Proceedings of Feb., Mar., Apr., 1911.

Neruda, Jan. An Ancient Cottage. (Stará chatrč.) A poem translated by
    Libbie A. Breuer. The New South. Dallas. May, 1912.

Nigrin, Jaroslav Victor. Teaching of Bohemian in (American) High
    Schools and Colleges. The Bohemian Review. Chicago. 1:11. June,
    1917.

Periodical Press of Bohemia. Illustrated. Review of Reviews. New York.
    31:85-6. Jan., 1905.

Political and Social Poetry among the Czechs. Review of Reviews. New
    York. 47:358-59. Mar., 1913.

Sclavonic Traditional Poetry, in a letter to ... Zaboy, Slawoy, and
    Ludeck. A Sclavonian Tale. Translated from the Bohemo-Sclavonian
    Dialect. Blackwood’s Magazine. Edinburgh. 10:145-51. Sept., 1821.

Sládek, Josef V. A Handful of Bohemian Heather. The Bohemian Voice.
    Omaha. Feb., 1893.

Talvj (Mrs. Robinson). Slavonic Popular Poetry. North American Review.
    Boston and New York. 43:85-120. 1836.

Tille, Václav. Bohemian Literature. Athenæum. London. 1891-92, 2:6,
    July 2; 1892-93, 2:8, July 1; 1893-94, 2:8, July 7; 1896-97, 2:8,
    July 3; 1897-98, 2:11; 1899-1900, 2:6-7, July 7; 1900-01, 2:10-11,
    July 6; 1901-02, 2:8, July 5; 1902-03, 2:8, July 4; 1903-04,
    2:296-97, Sept. 3.

Vrchlický, Jaroslav. An Arabic Motive. Translated by Jan Havlasa.
    Osvěta Americká. Omaha. Oct. 7, 1908.

Ward, A. W. Bohemian Literature in the 14th Century. Macmillan’s
    Magazine. London. 38:40-48. 1878.




XV

MISCELLANY


PUBLICATIONS

Baker, James. Report on technical and commercial education in East
    Russia, Poland, Galicia, Silesia, Bohemia. 122 pp. Wyman & Sons.
    London. 1900.

Bohemian-American Letter Writer; or Directions how to compose
    correctly, letters, documents, etc., which occur in the social
    relations and business life of the United States. 122 pp. August
    Geringer. Chicago. 1907.

Born, Baron Inigo. (Mineralogist and Counsellor of the Mines at
    Prague.) Series of Letters to Prof. Ferber on the Mines and
    Mountains of different Countries. To which is added John James
    Ferber’s Mineralogical History of Bohemia. 8º. Translated from the
    German by R. E. Raspe. 1777. London (?).

Chamber of Commerce and Industry in Prague. 6 pp. Politika. Prague.
    1911.

Merrylees, John. Carlsbad and its environs. With a medical treatise
    on the use of the waters by B. London. Illustrated. 8º. 199 pp.
    Sampson, Low & Co. London. 1886.

Moleville, M. Bertrand de. The Costumes of the Hereditary States of
    the House of Austria. Displayed in fifty coloured engravings; with
    descriptions and an introduction. 15 plates are Slovak, Bohemian
    and Moravian. Translated by R. C. Dallas. fo. 50 pl. W. Miller.
    London. 1804.

Rosický, Marie Bayer. Bohemian-American Cook Book. Tested and Practical
    Recipes for American and Bohemian Dishes. Translated into English
    by Rose Rosický. 8º. 306 pp. National Printing Company. Omaha. 1915.

Royal Bohemian Coal and Mining Company, Limited. Reports. 8º. 16 pp.
    Printed by McNeil and Moody. London. 1864.

Schoberl, Frederick. Austria: containing a description of the manners,
    customs, character and costumes of the people of that Empire.
    Illustrated. Bohemia, chap. 2, and pp. 28-31. C. S. Williams.
    Philadelphia. W. Brown, printer. 1828.

Zmrhal, Jaroslav J. (První čítanka občanská.) A Primer of Civics;
    designed for the guidance of the immigrant. English and Bohemian on
    opposite pages. 66 pp. Colonial Dames of Illinois. Chicago. 1912.


ARTICLES

Baker, James. Manual Training in Central Europe. The Practical
    Teacher’s Art Monthly. London, Aug., 1900.

Canalization of the Elbe (Labe) and the Moldau (Vltava). Illustrated.
    Scientific American Supplement. New York. 57:23598. Mar., 1904.

Cleef, E. van. Overlooked Bohemia. Map. Journal of Geography. Appleton,
    Wis. 14:39-42. Oct., 1915.

Executioner’s Sword. The Sabbath School Visitor. Philadelphia. 36:19.
    Oct. 1, 1885. Reprint from the Edinburgh Children’s Record.
    Description of the (supposed) sword with which Bohemian Martyrs
    were beheaded at Prague, June 21, 1621.

Feistmantel, O. The Bohemian Coal Beds. Nature. London. 14:268-70. 1876.

Hawes, J. B. Streets and Roads of Bohemia. U. S. Consular Reports.
    38:495. 1891.

Kay, C. de. Trout Farms of Bohemia. U. S. Consular Reports. 49:41. 1895.

Krabschitz Institute. A Singular History. By R. S. A. The
    Congregationalist. London. 7:611-14. Oct., 1878.

Král, J. J. Reminiscences of a Bohemian Gymnasium. The Inlander. Ann
    Arbor. 2:309-15. Apr., 1892.

---- The Three Bohemias. Music. Chicago. 5:103-05. 1893.

---- Prokop Diviš, Inventor of the Lightning Rod. Popular Science
    Monthly. New York. Jan., 1893.

Milles, Jeremiah. Of the Carlsbad Mineral Waters in Bohemia.
    Philosophical Transactions. London. Abr. 11:68. 1757.

Newbigin, M. I. Departments of Natural History of the Bohemian Museum.
    Natural Science Magazine. London. 8:168.

Slavic Transliteration. Report of the A. L. A. Committee. International
    Congress of Librarians in Paris. 1900. Report by Bořivoj Prusík of
    Prague. Library Journal. New York. 25:580-83, 1900; 27:16. 1902.

[Illustration:

                                A
                           DESCRIPTION
                              OF THE
                              WORKS

             Of the Ingenious DELINEATOR and ENGRAVER

                       _WENCESLAUS HOLLAR_,

                          DISPOSED INTO

                   CLASSES of DIFFERENT SORTS;

                              WITH

                     Some Account of His LIFE.

                         [Illustration]

             Printed in LONDON, for the EDITOR _G.V._
              A Member of the SOCIETY of ANTIQUARIES.
                            MDCCXLV.

Wenceslaus Hollar

Portrait by Himself]




XVI

MUSIC


PUBLICATIONS

Baker, Theodore, editor. A Biographical Dictionary of Musicians.
    Contains short biographies of Antonín Dvořák, J. L. Dussek, F.
    Škroup, B. Smetana, Z. Fibich, V. Novák, V. J. Tomášek, etc. G.
    Schirmer. New York. 1905.

Bendl, Karel. Twelve Gypsy Songs. Czech and English texts. Novello,
    Ewer & Co. London.

Burchenal, Elizabeth, editor. Folk Dances and Singing Games: twenty-six
    folk dances including Bohemian. Illustrated. G. Schirmer. New York.
    1909.

Celebrated Pianists of the Past and Present Time. Contains portraits
    and biographies of V. J. Tomášek, J. L. Dussek, etc. H. Grevel and
    Co. London. 1895.

Dickinson, Edward. The Study of the History of Music. Recent Music in
    Bohemia, pp. 375-76. Charles Scribner’s Sons. New York. 1905.

Dickinson, Clarence and Helen A. The Influence of the Reformation on
    Music: 1517-1917; in, Excursions in Musical History. The H. W. Gray
    Co. New York. 1917.

Dussek, Jan Ladislav. The Captive of Spillburg, in two acts. Altered
    from the favourite French drama called Le Southerrain, with a
    preface by the translator. The music by ----. 8º. 47 pp. M. Stace.
    London. 1799.

Dvořák, Antonín. Saint Ludmila; an oratorio, written by Jaroslav
    Vrchlický, the music composed by ----. The English version by the
    Rev. Dr. Troutbeck. Book of words, with analytical notes, by Joseph
    Bennett. Novello, Ewer & Co. London. 1886.

---- The Spectre’s Bride; a dramatic cantata, written by K. J. Erben.
    English version by the Rev. Dr. Troutbeck. Novello, Ewer & Co.
    London. 1886.

---- Four Songs. English words by Mrs. John Morgan, authorized by
    Dvořák. N. Simrock. Berlin. 1887.

---- by Henry T. Finck in, Famous Composers and their Works, edited by
    John Knowles Paine and others. J. B. Millet Co. Boston. 1891-1900.

---- in, From Grieg to Brahms; studies of some modern composers and
    their art, pp. 72-95, by Daniel Gregory Mason. The Outlook Co. New
    York. 1903.

---- Sketch of his life and estimates of his genius and place in art.
    Portrait and bibliography in, Masters in Music, v. 4, p. 20. Daniel
    Gregory Mason, editor. Bates and Guild Company. Boston. 1904.

Elson, Arthur. Modern Composers of Europe. Bohemians and others, pp.
    91-114. Portraits of Dvořák and Smetana. Sir Isaac Pitman & Sons.
    London. 1909.

Grove’s Dictionary of Music and Musicians. Includes mention of V.
    J. Tomášek, B. Smetana, Antonín Dvořák, Z. Fibich, V. Novák, O.
    Nováček, F. Ondříček, Jan Kubelík, etc. The Macmillan Co. London
    and New York. 1904.

Hadden, J. Cuthbert. Modern Musicians. Jan Kubelík, pp. 166-71.
    Portrait. T. Foulis. London. 1914.

Hadow, W. H. Studies in Modern Music. Antonín Dvořák, pp. 171-225.
    Portrait. Seeley and Co. London. 1895.

Kappey, J. A., editor. Songs of Eastern Europe, a collection of 100
    volkslieder. Includes 18 Bohemian songs. English translation by
    Clara Kappey. William A. Pond & Co. New York.

Narrative History. The Art of Music. A comprehensive library of
    information for music lovers and musicians. Illustrated. 14
    vs. Daniel Gregory Mason, editor-in-chief. Includes: Musical
    Development in Bohemia, v. 3, pp. 165-86; Bohemian and Polish Folk
    Song, v. 5, pp. 127-28; Chamber Music Works of Smetana and Dvořák,
    v. 7, pp. 338-585; The Orchestra, Modern Bohemia, v. 8, pp. 374-82;
    Bohemian Opera, v. 9, pp. 439-41. The National Society of Music.
    New York. 1915-17.

Pisek, Vincent. Twenty Bohemian Folk Songs. English and Bohemian texts.
    Translated and compiled by ----. 70 pp. New York. 1912.

Pratt, Waldo Selden. The History of Music. A Handbook and Guide for
    Students. G. Schirmer. New York. 1907.

Runciman, John F. Old Scores and New Readings: Discussions on Musical
    Subjects. 8º. 279 pp. Antonín Dvořák, pp. 249-54. Unicorn Press.
    London. 1899.

Smetana, Bedřich. The Bartered Bride: a comic opera in three acts,
    libretto by K. Sabina. English version by Helen J. Harvitt. 8º. 43
    pp. F. Rullman. New York. 1908.

---- Synopsis of the Bartered Bride in, A Guide to Modern Opera, by
    Esther Singleton. Pp. 1-9. Dodd, Mead & Co. New York. 1909.

---- The Bartered Bride: For the benefit of the Legal Aid Society,
    Metropolitan Opera House, April the twenty-ninth, nineteen hundred
    and nine. 7 plates. New York.

---- Bohemian Cradle-Song from the Opera Hubička (Kiss), adapted for
    concert use by Kurt Schindler. English version by Henry G. Chapman.
    G. Schirmer. New York. 1910.

---- in, The Opera Goers’ Complete Guide, by Leo Melitz. Translated
    by Richard Salinger. Synopsis of The Bartered Bride, pp. 31-32.
    Dalibor, pp. 63-65; The Kiss, pp. 169-71. Dodd, Mead and Company.
    New York. 1913.

---- Synopsis of The Bartered Bride in, The Opera Book, by Edith B.
    Ordway, pp. 28-30. Sully and Kleinteich. New York. 1915.

Špaček, Anna and Boyd, Neva L. Folk Dances of Bohemia and Moravia
    for School Playground and Social Center. Harmonizing of music by
    Gertrude Shoemaker. Saul Brothers. Chicago. 1917.

Stories of the Operas and the Singers. Emmy Destinn, p. 40. Portrait.
    John Long. London. 1910.

Zajíček, Frank. John Huss Oratorio. English words by ---- according to
    the Bohemian version of V. J. Dvořák and a short sketch of the
    life of Huss. National Printing and Publishing Co. Chicago. 1915.


ARTICLES

Dvořák, Antonín. By H. E. Krehbiel. Portrait. The Century Magazine. New
    York. 44:657-60. Sept., 1892.

---- By J. J. Král. Music. Chicago. 4:561-71. 1893.

---- Biographical Sketch. Metronome. New York. July, 1894.

---- Saturday Review. London. 81:323-24. Mar., 1896.

---- The Return of ----. Portrait. The Critic. New York. 21:236. 1892;
    30:241. 1897.

---- Symphonies of ---- by W. B. S. Mathews. Music. Chicago. 17:615.
    Apr., 1900.

---- The Work of ----. Portrait. By Daniel Gregory Mason. The Outlook.
    New York. 71:649-56. 1902.

---- Some Appreciative Remarks on ---- by P. M. F. Hedley. Portrait
    modelled from life. Musical Standard. London. 20:506. Sept. 12,
    1903.

---- Sketch and portrait. Athenæum. London. 1:603. May 7, 1904.

---- Independent. New York. 56:1077-78. May 12, 1904.

---- Dead. Sketch of his life with list of his works, and portrait.
    Musical Courier. New York. 48:18; 25. May, 1904.

---- Bohemian-American Composer. Portrait. Review of Reviews. New York.
    29:750. June, 1904.

---- The Music of ----. Musician. Boston. 15:89. Feb., 1910.

---- Portrait of. Review of Reviews. New York. 43:621. May, 1911.

---- Student Days with ----. By H. P. Hopkins. Etude. Philadelphia.
    30:5. 1912.

Destinn, Emmy. An Opera Singer, who is a musician, a musician who is
    a cultivated woman. By Katherine M. Roof. Musician. Boston. 19:4;
    265-66. 1914.

Dussek, John L. A Neglected Composer. By J. Mendelsohn. Musician.
    Boston. 19:91. Feb., 1914.

Hejda, F. K. The Echo. Translated by J. J. Král. Music. Chicago.
    10:584-92. Oct., 1896.

Hensel, Octavia. Student Days in the Imperial Land. Music. Chicago.
    12:567-69. 1897.

Hlaváč, V. J. His Sustaining Piano-forte. Music. Chicago. 4:311-15.
    1893.

Král, J. J. Bohemian Popular Poetry and Music. Music. Chicago.
    3:485-509. Mar., 1893.

---- Bohemian Music in 1894. Translation of an article by F. K. Hejda
    in Dalibor (Prague). Music. Chicago. 7:514-19. Mar., 1895.

---- History of the Polka. Music. Chicago. 9:305-12. Jan., 1896.

Krehbiel, H. E. Folk-music Studies of the Magyars and Slavs, including
    Bohemia. New York Daily Tribune. July 30; Aug. 6, 1899.

---- Jan Kubelík, with portrait sketch by Cecelia Beaux. The Century
    Magazine. New York. 41:744-46. 1902.

Mackenzie, A. C. The Bohemian School of Music. Quarterly Magazine
    of the International Musical Society. Part 2. 7:145-72. Leipsic.
    1905-06.

Smetana, Bedřich. The Famous Czech Composer. The Review of Reviews. New
    York. 9:482. Apr., 1894.

---- Father of Bohemian Music. By J. J. Král. Music. Chicago. 9:144-53;
    10:11-15; 10:155-58. 1896.

---- Celebrated Original Compositions: Overture to the Bartered Bride.
    Metronome. New York. 27:5; 40, 41, 55. May, 1911.

---- By J. E. S. Vojan. The Sunday American. Cedar Rapids. Apr. 21,
    1912.

---- Dvořák and Fibich. By J. E. S. Vojan. The Sunday Republican. Cedar
    Rapids. May 5, 1912.

---- My Country: Six Symphonic Poems. By J. E. S. Vojan. The Sunday
    Tribune. Chicago. Oct. 9, 1912.

Vojan, J. E. S. The Bohemian Opera. The Daily News. Chicago. Nov. 8,
    1911; same, The Record-Herald. Chicago. Nov. 19, 1911.

---- Composers of Genius, whose works are neglected in the United
    States. The Sun. New York. Nov. 18, 1911; same, The Daily Tribune.
    Chicago. Dec. 2, 1911.

---- A Sketch of the Modern Musical History of Bohemia. English section
    of the Orgán Bratrstva Č. S. P. S. Chicago. 25:258. 1917.

Zelenka, Lerando L. Music in Bohemia. Komenský, Organ of the Federation
    of Komenský Educational Clubs. Omaha. 8:271-76. Dec., 1916.




XVII

PERIODICALS


PERIODICALS[17]

  [17] Josef Pastor published a monthly journal devoted to the interests of
  emigrants, in Hamburg, 1884. Lessons in elementary English were printed
  in every issue. The publication was called _České Osady v Americe_.
  (Bohemian Settlements in America.)

  _The Orgán Bratrstva Č. S. P. S._, Chicago, official organ of the
  Bohemian Slavonic Benevolent Societies in the United States of America
  and Canada, has an English section.

  _The Bratrský Věstník Z. Č. B. J._, Omaha, official monthly of the
  Western Bohemian Fraternal Association, maintains an English section.

_The Bohemian Voice._ Omaha. Organ of the Bohemian Americans in the
    United States. Published from Sept., 1892, to Nov., 1894. Thomas
    Čapek edited the magazine from the beginning to Apr., 1894, when J.
    J. Král became editor.

_American Bi-Monthly. Chicago._ Two numbers published, Dec., 1914 and
    Feb., 1915. A. G. Melichar and J. J. Zmrhal, editors.

_The Bohemian Review._ Monthly. Chicago. Official Organ of the Bohemian
    (Czech) National Alliance in America. First number Feb., 1917.
    Jaroslav F. Smetanka, editor.




XVIII

PLANS. MAPS. VIEWS. JOURNALS


PUBLICATIONS

Bohemia, Account of the Campaign of 1756, in Bohemia, Silesia and
    Saxony. 8º. Griffith. London. 1757.

---- The Theatre of War in the Kingdom of ---- by T. Jefferys. Drawn
    from the Survey of J. C. Müller. London. 1757.

---- Moravia, Saxony, Silesia, etc. Correct Map of ----. Showing the
    Seat of War between the Prussians and Austrians in those parts.
    1770. (?)

---- Cruchley’s New Map of the Seat of War in ----. Showing all the
    fortified Towns, Railways, Roads, etc. London. 1866.

---- Two Views of ---- by Walmsley, engraved by Bluck. 1801.

---- The Campaign in ----, 1866, by G. J. R. Glünecke. Maps and Plans.
    London. 1907.

Prague. An Internal View of a Great Hall at ----. George Egidius
    Sadeler. 1607.

---- An Exact Plan of ---- with the particular Disposition of ye French
    and Austrian Armies, in ye present Siege, with ye Retrenchments
    made by ye Marshals de Broglio and de Belleisle for its defence.
    Taken by M. de Broglio’s Chief Engineer and sent to Mr. Donnelly.
    Engrav’d, Printed and Publish’d for D. Donnelly. Sept. 6, 1742.

---- A Plan of the City of ---- with the French Camp, and the
    disposition of the Austrian Army to attack the same in their
    Trenches. Copyed from an original Draught sent from the Austrian
    Camp. M. Senex. London. 1742.

---- An Exact Account of all that passed at ----, from the French
    Army’s flight thither after the battle between the King of Prussia
    and Prince Charles of Lorrain, down to the raising of the Siege
    ----. By an Engineer in the French Armey at Prague. Translated from
    the French. With a postscript, containing a few reflections on
    Marshall Belleisle’s evacuating Prague, etc. 8º. London. 1743.

---- A Journal of the Siege of ----, wrote by a principal officer to
    one of his friends. 8º. Dublin. 1743.

---- A Plan of the City of ---- with the Prussian Camp and Batteries.
    1757. With a Map of the Country round ---- showing ye Junction and
    March of the Prussian Armies.

[Illustration:

  M.S.

  Winceslaus Hollar a Bohemian Gent, born in Prague, famous
  in Arts, by his indefatigable Labours has left many Works to
  externize his Memory; being first encouraged by his Noble Patron.
  belov’d and esteem’d by the Curious, having peregrinated on
  Earth (in many parts) at last was here deposited to Rest. He
  liv’d in London and dyed in this Parish 28 of March 1677. Aº Æt 70

Wenceslaus Hollar’s Memorial Tablet]

Herrman, Augustine. View of New Amsterdam (New York) about the year
    1650. Appended to J. H. Innes’ New Amsterdam and its People.

---- Virginia and Maryland. As it is Planted and Inhabited this present
    Year 1670 Surveyed and Exactly Drawne by the Only Labour and
    Endevour of ----, Bohemiensis. W. Faithorne, Sculpt.

The Czecho-Slovak State, map of ---- colored. Supplement to The New
    Europe. London. 2:64-5. Jan., 1917.




XIX

POLITICS


PUBLICATIONS

Austrian Terrorism in Bohemia. Introduction by Thomas G. Masaryk. 12º.
    38 pp. Chap. I., The Political Murder of Dr. Kramář, reprint from
    The New Statesman. London. June 17, 1916; Chap. II. and III.,
    reprint from articles in La Nation Tchèque. Paris. May 1 and June
    15, 1916. Czech National Alliance in Great Britain. Printed by J.
    Truscott & Son. London. 1916.

Bailey, W. F. The Slavs of the War Zone. 8º. 266 pp. Illustrated.
    Chapman and Hall. London. 1916.

Beneš, Edouard. Bohemia’s Case for Independence. Introductory by Henry
    Wickham Steed. Map and bibliography. 129 pp. George Allen and
    Unwin. London. 1917.

Beneš, Vojta. A Memorial (appeal) to the International. Pp. 3-8.
    Signed: Bohemian Section of the Socialist Party in America. In
    Russian, French, English, German, Bohemian. Chicago. 1917.

Brown, Charles L. Our Fellow Citizens--The Bohemians and Slovaks. 8
    pp. Address delivered at Philadelphia, Apr. 14, 1917.

Čapek, Thomas. Austria-Hungary and the Slavonians. 22 pp. Written in
    commemoration of the Mass Meeting of citizens of Slavic origin,
    held at Carnegie Hall, New York City, December 14, 1912, for
    the purpose of protesting against Austria-Hungary’s unjustified
    interference with the Balkan Slavs.

---- Bohemia Under Hapsburg Misrule. A Study of the Ideals and
    Aspirations of the Bohemian and Slovak Peoples, as they relate to
    and are affected by the great European War. Articles by, Thomas
    Čapek: Have the Bohemians a Place in the Sun? and, The Slovaks
    of Hungary. Bohumil Šimek: Why Bohemia Deserves Freedom. H. A.
    Miller: The Bohemian Character. Will S. Monroe: Place of Bohemia
    in the Creative Arts. Leo Wiener: The Bohemians and the Slavic
    Regeneration. Emily G. Balch: The Bohemians as Immigrants. Edited
    by ----. 8º. 187 pp. Fleming H. Revell Company. New York. 1915.

Chéradame, André. The Pangerman Plot Unmasked. Berlin’s Formidable
    Peace-Trap of the Drawn War. With an introduction by the Earl of
    Cromer. Maps. 235 pp. Charles Scribner’s Sons. New York. 1917.

Curtin, D. Thomas. The Land of Deepening Shadow; Germany-at-war. 8º.
    337 pp. Police Rule in Bohemia, pp. 194-201. George H. Doran
    Company. New York. 1917.

Czech Hatred of Austria Grows. Reprint of an article in the New York
    Sun. 4 pp. Bohemian National Alliance in America. New York. 1917.

Gayda, Virginio. Modern Austria; her racial and social problems.
    Czechs, pp. 66-89. Dodd, Mead and Company. New York. 1915.

Headlam, J. W. The Dead Lands of Europe. 31 pp. Bohemia, pp. 13-18.
    George H. Doran Company. New York.

The Independence of the Czecho-Slovak Nation. Quotations from Wilson,
    Viviani, Balfour, Palacký, Masaryk, Seton-Watson and others. 20 pp.
    Printed for the Czecho-Slovak Arts Club of New York City. Feb. 26,
    1918.

Kelly, R. J. Bohemia and the Czechs. 12 pp. Illustrated. Dublin. 1915.

Kratochvil, Slavomír, editor. The Voice of Freedom (Revoluční Výzva.)
    English issue of the Czech-Slovak monthly. Pp. 153-92. New York.
    Oct., 1916.

Lowell, A. Lawrence. Governments and Parties in Continental Europe. 2
    vs. Bohemia, chap 8. Houghton Mifflin Company. New York. 1896.

Mamatey, Albert. The Situation in Austria-Hungary. 16 pp. Reprint of an
    article published in the Journal of Race Development. Worcester.
    Oct., 1915.

Marchant, Francis P. Bohemia: Her Story and her Claims. 15 pp. Czech
    National Alliance in Great Britain. London. 1917. Reprint of an
    article in the Asiatic Review. London. 22:147-62. Aug., 1916.

Masaryk, Thomas G. The Problem of Small Nations in the European Crisis.
    Inaugural Lecture at the University of London, King’s College. 32
    pp. Council for the Study of International Relations. London. 1916.
    Condensed in Times Current History Magazine. New York. Dec., 1915.

---- The Slavs among the Nations. Reprint of an article from La Nation
    Tchèque. Paris. May 15, 1916. Lecture delivered by ---- Feb. 22,
    1916, before the Institute of Slav Studies in Paris. 38 pp. Czech
    National Alliance in Great Britain. Printed by J. Truscott & Son.
    London. 1916.

---- Declaration of the Bohemian (Czech) Foreign Committee. Comments
    of London papers. 14 pp. Bohemian National Alliance in America.
    Chicago. 1915.

Memorandum submitted by the Bohemian (Czech) Presbyterians to the
    General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the U. S. A. at
    Dallas, Texas. 4 pp. May 17-25, 1917.

Namier, Lewis B. The Czecho-Slovaks, an Oppressed Nationality. 24 pp.
    Hodder and Stoughton. London. 1917.

---- The Case of Bohemia. 10 pp. Czech National Alliance in Great
    Britain. London. 1917. Reprint from The New Statesman. London.
    Dec., 1916.

Pergler, Charles. Bohemia’s Claim to Independence. An address
    delivered before the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of
    Representatives of the United States, February 25, 1916. 12 pp.
    Bohemian National Alliance in America. Chicago. 1916.

---- Bohemian (Czech) Hopes and Aspirations. A lecture delivered before
    the State University of Minnesota, March 28, 1916. 19 pp. Bohemian
    National Alliance in America. Chicago. 1916.

---- An Open Letter to Miss Jane Addams and Other American Advocates of
    Peace. 2 pp. Signed: Bohemian National Alliance in America. 1916.

---- The Bohemians (Czechs) in the Present Crisis. An address delivered
    on the 28th day of May, 1916, in Chicago, at a meeting held to
    commemorate the deeds of Bohemian volunteers in the Great War. 23
    pp. Bohemian National Alliance in America. Chicago. 1916.

---- The Heart of Europe. An address delivered in Washington, December
    11, 1916, at a Conference of oppressed or dependent nationalities.
    With a foreword by Alois F. Kovářík. 39 pp. Bohemian (Czech)
    National Alliance in America. Chicago. 1917.

---- The Bohemian Question. 6 pp. Reprint from Annals of the American
    Academy of Political and Social Science. Philadelphia. 1917.

---- Should Austria-Hungary Continue to Exist? 14 pp. Reprint from
    The Yale Review. New Haven. 7:308-21. Jan., 1918. Yale Publishing
    Association. New Haven.

Prochazka, J. Bohemia’s Claim for Freedom. Edited by ----. Introduction
    by G. K. Chesterton. Illustrated. Map. 12º. 66 pp. Chatto & Windus.
    London. 1915.

Recht, Charles. Bohemia and her Position in the War. 14 pp. Map. 24º.
    Czech Relief Association. New York. 1915.

Schierbrand, Wolf von. Austria-Hungary: The Polyglot Empire. Map. 8º.
    352 pp. Frederick A. Stokes. New York. 1917.

Seton-Watson, Robert William (pseud. Scotus Viator). The Future of
    Austria-Hungary and the Attitude of the Great Powers. 8º. 77 pp.
    Archibald Constable & Co. London. 1907.

---- German, Slav and Magyar. A Study in the Origins of the Great War.
    198 pp. Maps. Williams and Norgate. London. 1916.

Smetanka, J. F. The Position of the Bohemians (Czechs) in the European
    War. 40 pp. Bohemian National Alliance in America. Chicago. 1916.

Steed, Henry Wickham. A Programme for Peace. Reprint from the Edinburgh
    Review. London. 24 pp. Bohemian National Alliance in America. New
    York. 1916.

Toynbee, Arnold J. Nationality and the War. With many colored maps.
    Tchech (Czech) and German in the New Austria, pp. 261-72. J. M.
    Dent & Son. London. 1915.

The Voice of an Oppressed People. 48 pp. Two maps. Articles by T. G.
    Masaryk and Jaroslav F. Smetanka. Bohemian National Alliance in
    America. Chicago. 1917.


ARTICLES

Allen, Frederick H. Austria the Crux of the Peace Problem.
    Renationalization of Dual Monarchy and abolition of autocratic rule
    over subject races necessary forerunner of any permanent settlement
    of world troubles. Position of Czechs, as vassals of Vienna. War
    section magazine of the New York Herald. Sept. 30, 1917.

Austria and Bohemia. By the Bohemian National Alliance in America. The
    New York Times. Jan. 21, 1917.

---- Hungary and the Slavs. The New Europe. London. 5:312-16. Dec. 20,
    1917.

---- Constitutionalism. The Westminster Review. London. 79:175-97.
    Apr., 1863.

Baker, James. The Struggle at Prague. The Quiver. London. 700-05;
    786-91. 1902.

Barry, Canon William. How to Break Austria. The Nineteenth Century.
    London and New York. 82:885-902. Nov., 1917.

Beneš, Edouard. Germany and the Hapsburg Problem. The New Europe.
    London. 4:51-6. July 26, 1917.

Bohemian Settlement. New Diet of Bohemia. The Spectator. London.
    64:109. Jan., 1890.

Bohemia, and the Austro-Hungarian Empire. Edinburgh Review. London.
    198:463. Oct., 1905.

---- Two Rival Nationalities. Political Science Quarterly. Boston.
    21:155-58. Mar., 1906.

---- Troubles. Independent. New York. 75:524-25. Aug. 28, 1913.

---- Under Hapsburg Misrule. Review. The Spectator. London. 115:19-20.
    July 3, 1915.

---- The Outlook. New York. 114:159. Sept., 1916.

---- The Round Table. London. 333-41. Mar., 1917.

---- Future. Review of Reviews. New York. 55:307-08. Mar., 1917.

---- and Hungary. The Outlook. New York. 116:282. June 20, 1917.

---- Fighters. The Literary Digest. New York. Illustrated. 54:1920.
    June 23, 1917.

---- The Voice of. The New Europe. London. 5:223. Nov. 29, 1917.

---- Army. The New Ally. The New Europe. London. 5:284-86. Dec. 13,
    1917.

---- and Alsace. The New Europe. London. 5:318. Dec. 20, 1917.

---- and the Allies. The New Europe. London. 6:27-29. Jan. 17, 1918.

Bonsal, Stephen. Bohemia. The Submerged Front. The North American
    Review. New York. 206:426-35. Sept., 1917.

Brooks, Sydney. Fifty Years of Francis Josef. Harper’s Magazine. New
    York. 98:310-19. 1899.

Bruno, Guido. The Czechs and their Bohemia. Pearson’s Magazine. New
    York. 38:110. Sept., 1917.

Buxton, N. and Masaryk, Thomas G. Liberation of Bohemia. The New
    Statesman. London. 8:419-21. Feb. 3, 1917.

Catholic Crisis in Bohemia. The Literary Digest. New York. 53:1036-37.
    Oct. 21, 1916.

Chéradame, André. How to Destroy Pan-Germany. The Atlantic Monthly.
    Boston. 120:819-33. Dec., 1917.

Crumbling of Austria-Hungary. The Spectator. London. July 10, 1915.

Czech Aspirations. The Literary Digest. New York. 51:11. July 3, 1915.

Dorrian, Cecil I. Ideal of re-nationalized Europe unfolded by great
    Czech leader. (Masaryk.) The Globe and Commercial Advertiser. New
    York. Jan. 25, 1917.

Dušek, V. Liberal Austria. The Catholic Presbyterian. London. 2:27-33.
    1879.

Forman, Josef. Liberation of the Czecho-Slovaks. The Nineteenth
    Century. London and New York. 81:570-78. Mar., 1917; same, The
    Spectator. London. 118:98. Jan. 27, 1917.

---- Liberation of Bohemia. The New Statesman. London. 8:443-44. Feb.
    10, 1917.

Gooch, G. P. Czechs: Elections in Austria. Westminster Review. London.
    154:619-25. Dec., 1900.

Grande, Julian. Austria Seething with Dissension. The New York Times.
    July 22, 1917.

Gribble, Francis H. Bohemia in the Battle. The Aspirations of the
    Czechs. A Problem of the War. Map. The Graphic. London. 95:120.
    Feb. 3, 1917.

---- Czech claims and Magyar intrigues. The Nineteenth Century. London
    and New York. 81:579-92. Mar., 1917.

Hamlin, C. Slavic Races and Panslavism. Bibliotheca Sacra. Andover.
    34:158-67. 1877.

Hapsburg Monarchy and the Slavs. Nation. New York. 87:541-42. Dec. 3,
    1908.

[Illustration:

                    WÝBOR Z BÁSNICTWÍ ČESKÉHO.

                       CHESKIAN ANTHOLOGY:

                              BEING

                         A HISTORY OF THE

                  Poetical Literature of Bohemia,

                     WITH TRANSLATED SPECIMENS

                                BY

                           JOHN BOWRING.

                   Prawan wlast gen w srdcí nosíme,
                   Tuto nebze bíti ani krásti.
                                               KOLLAR.

            Our heart--our country’s casket and defence--
            Our country, none shall steal--none tear it thence.

                      Hudbu a zpěwy Čech milug.


                             _LONDON_:

                ROWLAND HUNTER, St. PAUL’S CHURCH-YARD.

                               1832

Sir John Bowring’s Bohemian Anthology]

Hard, William. The Case of Austria-Hungary. Metropolitan. New York.
    46:23. Oct., 1917.

---- To Split the Germans. Metropolitan. New York. 47:12. Feb., 1917.

Heilprin, A. Bohemia and Bohemians. Nation. New York. 60:305-06. 1895.
    Review of Robert H. Vickers’ History of Bohemia and James Baker’s
    Pictures from Bohemia.

Heilprin, M. The Bohemian Question and the Bohemians. Nation. New York.
    9:246. 1867.

---- Slavic Agitations in Austria. Nation. New York. 12:38. 1871.

---- Nationality Strifes in Austria-Hungary. Nation. New York. 36:291.
    1893.

---- Czech Revival in Austria. Nation. New York. 36:545. 1883.

Hrbkova, Šárka B. The Attitude of the Bohemians. Nebraska State
    Journal. Lincoln. Feb. 13, 1916.

---- An Eloquent Appeal for a Free Bohemia. Omaha Nebraskan. Omaha. May
    31, 1917.

---- Why Bohemia? Why Czechs? Omaha Nebraskan. Omaha. July 26, 1917.

Hrdlička, Aleš. Austria’s Babel of Tongues Brings her Low in World’s
    War. Public Ledger. Philadelphia. Aug. 31, 1916.

Jerrold, Walter C. The Czechs. Pall Mall Gazette. London. Oct. 26, 1914.

Kelly, R. J. The Slavic and Other Small Nations and the War. The
    Outlook. London. Oct. 30, 1915.

---- Repression in Bohemia. The Outlook. London. Nov. 20, 1915.

Kramář, Karel. Europe and the Bohemian Question. National Review.
    London. 40:183. 1902.

---- Condemnation of ---- with portrait. The Bohemian Review. Chicago.
    1:11-14. Mar., 1917.

Landa, M. J. Bohemia and the War. The Contemporary Review. New York and
    London. 108:100-04. July, 1915.

Levine, Isaac Don. Bohemia. The Birth of New Nations. Series of
    articles in the New York Tribune. July 8, 1917.

Long, R. C. Race questions and the British policy; a letter from
    Vienna. Fortnightly Review. London and New York. 92:160-74. July,
    1909.

Lützow, Count. The Bohemian Question. The Nineteenth Century. London
    and New York. 44:957. 1898.

---- American Influences on Austria-Hungary. World’s Work. New York.
    9:564-65. Dec., 1904.

Masaryk, Thomas G. Pangermanism and the Eastern Question. The New
    Europe. London. 1:2-19. Oct. 19, 1916.

---- Austria Under Francis Joseph. The New Europe. London. 1:193-203.
    Nov. 30, 1916.

---- Bohemia and the European Crisis. The New Europe. London. 2:33-47.
    Jan. 25, 1917.

---- The Future Bohemia. The New Europe. London. 2:161-74. Feb. 22,
    1917.

Mika, G. H. The Army of Victory or Death. The Outlook. New York.
    118:321. Feb. 27, 1918.

Miller, H. A. Nationalism in Bohemia and Poland. North American Review.
    New York. 200:879-86. Dec., 1914.

Nosek, V. Austria: a Study in Confusion. The New Europe. London.
    4:167-71. Aug. 23, 1917.

Ordéga, L. Bohemia and Austria. Chautauquan. Meadville. 19:203-07. 1894.

Palda, L. J. The Bohemians and their Struggle for Home Rule. Lecture
    prepared for the Astor (New York) Library Club. Midland Monthly
    Magazine. Des Moines. Feb., Mar., 1896.

Panther, (pseud.) Poles, Czechs and Jugoslavs. The New Europe. London.
    3:225-36. June 7, 1917.

Pan-Slav Congress meeting in St. Petersburg in 1908. Fortnightly
    Review. London and New York. 90:145-46. July, 1908.

Pergler, Charles. Independent Bohemian-Slovak State. The New Republic.
    New York. 11:21-2. May 5, 1917.

Prince, J. D. Pan-Slavonic Ideal. Canadian Magazine. Toronto. 47:15-18.
    May, 1916.

Roosevelt, Theodore. The Peace of Victory for which we Strive. With
    Map. Metropolitan. New York. July, 1917. (The Czech and his close
    kinsmen outside of Bohemia should form a new commonwealth.)

Rubicon. (pseud.) The Czechs and Austria. The New Europe. London.
    6:144-50. Feb. 14, 1918.

Schauffler, R. H. The Bohemian. The Outlook. New York. 97:558-61. Mar.,
    1911.

Schmitt, Bernadotte E. The Liberation of all Peoples. The New York
    Times. Apr. 22, 1917.

Sellers, Edith. Rival Leaders of the Czechs. Temple Bar. London.
    107:335-52. 1896; same, Living Age. Boston. 236-48. 1896.

Seton-Watson, R. W. Pan-Slavism. The Contemporary Review. London.
    140:419-29. Oct., 1916.

Slav Mutterings in Austria-Hungary. Map. The Literary Digest. New York.
    47:201-02. Aug. 9, 1913.

Sloss, Robert. Hope for Small Nations. The Globe and Commercial
    Advertiser. New York. July 27, 1916.

Smetanka, J. F. The Demands of the Bohemian People. The Journal of Race
    Development. Worcester. 8:157-70. Oct., 1917.

Steed, Henry Wickham. The Quintessence of Austria. The Edinburgh
    Review. London. 222:225-47. Oct., 1915.

---- Austria and Europe. Lecture delivered at King’s College, London.
    The New Europe. London. 5:359-66. Jan. 3, 1918; same cont.
    5:388-97. Jan. 10, 1918.

Stevenson, I. P. Bohemia’s Attitude Toward Francis Joseph. Independent.
    New York. 53:2036-39. Aug. 29, 1901.

Toynbee, Arnold J. The Slav Peoples. Political Quarterly. London.
    4:33-68. 1914.

Twain, Mark. Stirring Times in Austria. Harper’s Magazine. New York.
    96:530-40. 1898.

Voice of the Little Peoples. The Literary Digest. New York. 655-56.
    Sept. 25, 1915.

Vojan, J. E. S. Charles Havlíček, a National Poet and Martyr. The
    Record-Herald. Chicago. Feb. 6, 1911.

Washington, Booker T. Bohemia: Races and Politics. The Outlook. New
    York. 98:75-80. May 13, 1911.

Wertenbaker, T. J. Bitter war of races spurs cause of Middle Europe.
    Germans in Dual Monarchy look to the Hohenzollerns for help
    against Czech and Magyar encroachments upon their dominance. The
    Ledger. Philadelphia. July 30, 1917.

Wiener, Leo. The New Bohemia. Nation. New York. 73:128-29. Aug. 15,
    1901.

Wistein, Rose. The Little Peoples. Fra. East Aurora. June, 1917.

---- What Bohemia Demands. Address. Fra. East Aurora. August, 1917.

Wittelshöfer, O. Race Question in Austria-Hungary. Chautauquan.
    Meadville. 20:404-08. 1895.




XX

PRAGUE


PUBLICATIONS

Haven, Gilbert. The Pilgrim’s Wallet; or, Scraps of Travel Gathered
    in England, France and Germany. 12º. Prague, pp. 461-70. Hurd &
    Houghton. New York. 1869.

Howell, Charles Fish. Around the Clock in Europe; A Travel Sequence.
    Illustrated by H. F. Kellog. Prague, 4 P. M. to 5 P. M., pp.
    101-134. Houghton Mifflin Company. Boston. 1912.

Lützow, Count Francis. The Story of Prague. Illustrated by Nelly
    Erichsen. 212 pp. J. M. Dent & Co. London. 1902.

---- The Old Town Hall of Prague. Illustrated. 18 pp. Extract from a
    speech delivered at the Old Town Hall of Prague on the occasion of
    the visit of the Lord Mayor and Deputation of the Corporation of
    the City of London on the 18th day of September, 1911.

Prague and its Environs. 8º. Charles Bellmann. Prague. 1905.

---- Královské Hlavní Město Praha. Preface in Bohemian, French,
    English. 30 plates. City of Prague. 1908.

---- English Club. Annual Report. 33 pp. Prague. 1913.

Symons, Arthur. Cities. 8 photogravures. Prague, pp. 133-54. Pott,
    James & Co. New York. 1903.


ARTICLES

Baker, James. The Carl’s Bridge at Prague. Leisure Hour. London.
    40:752. Sept., 1891.

---- Prague and Bristol. Bristol Times and Press. Feb. 21, 1907.

Bedford, H. Visit to Prague and Vienna. Month. London. 39:33.

Davis, Mrs. J. W. Glimpse of Prague. Harper’s Magazine. New York.
    56:161. 1878.

Glaser, M. Pictures of Prague by Modern Artists. The International
    Studio. New York. 34:118-22. April, 1908.

Jansa, V. An Entrance Gate, Prague. Artist. New York. 31:111. 1902.

---- Ostrov Kampa, Prague. 1 pl. International Studio. New York.
    28:166-67. 1906.

Pite, Beresford. The Cathedral of St. Vitus, Prague. The Architectural
    Review. London. 8:226. 1900.

Prague. During the Feast of St. Nepomuk. Fraser’s Magazine. London.
    34:339-46. Sept., 1846.

---- and its Memories. Leisure Hour. London. 7:451-54. July, 1858.

---- Once a Week. London. 3:579-660. 1860.

---- Thein (Týn) Church. American Architect. New York. 3:42. Feb. 2,
    1878.

---- Rudolphinum. American Architect. New York. Dec. 20, 1890.

Ralston, W. R. S. Huss Festival at Prague. Good Words. London.
    10:839-47. 1869.

---- Poor of Prague. Good Words. London. 11:257-62. 1870.

Renselaer, M. G. van. Prague. American Architect. New York. 18:123.
    Sept., 1885.

Sweny, H. W. Prague. Cassel’s Magazine of Art. London. 1:37.

Symons, Arthur. Prague. Illustrated. Harper’s Magazine. New York.
    103:508-17. Sept., 1901; same condensed, Current Literature. New
    York. 31:450. Oct., 1901.




XXI

SOCIOLOGY AND ECONOMICS


PUBLICATIONS

Balch, Emily Greene. Our Slavic Fellow Citizens. 8º. 536 pp. Charities
    Publication Committee. New York. 1910.

Hodges, LeRoy. Slavs on Southern Farms. An account of the Bohemian,
    Slovak and Polish agricultural settlements in the Southern States.
    21 pp. Washington. Government Printing Office. 1914.

Hrbkova, Šárka B. History of the Bohemians in Nebraska. 48 pp. Nebraska
    State Historical Society. Lincoln. 1914.

Karpeles, Benno. Moravian and Silesian Miners; statistical inquiries
    into their social and economic condition. V. 1. Tables.
    Sonnenschein & Co. London. 1894.

McClure, Archibald. Leadership of the New America, Racial and
    Religious. 12º. 314 pp. The Bohemians, pp. 47-60. George H. Doran
    Co. New York. 1916.

Riis, Jacob. How the Other Half Lives; studies among the tenements of
    New York. 304 pp. The Bohemian tenement house cigar making, pp.
    136-47. Charles Scribner’s Sons. New York. 1891.

Stanton, Theodore, editor. The Woman Question in Europe. Introduction
    by Francis Power Cobbe. 8º. Chapter on Bohemian Women by Eliška
    Krásnohorská. G. P. Putnam’s Sons. New York. 1884.

Steiner, E. A. On the Trail of the Immigrant. Illustrated. 8º. 375 pp.
    Fleming H. Revell Company. New York. 1906.

---- From Alien to Citizen. The story of my life in America.
    Illustrated. 8º. Among the Bohemians, pp. 169-76. Fleming H. Revell
    Company. New York. 1914.


ARTICLES

Baker, James. Small Holdings in Ireland and Bohemia. Times. London.
    Oct. 17, 1891.

Balch, Emily Greene. The Story of a Bohemian Pioneer. Chautauquan.
    Chautauqua. 49:396-403. Feb., 1906.

---- Slav Emigration at its Source. Charities. New York. 15:438, 591.
    1905-06.

---- Our Slavic Fellow Citizens. The question of assimilation.
    Illustrated. Charities. New York. 19:1162-74. 1907.

---- Peasant Background of our Slavic Fellow-Citizens. Illustrated.
    Survey. New York. 24:666-67. Aug. 6, 1910.

[Illustration: Bedřich Smetana

Portrait by Max Švabinský]

Čapek, Thomas. The Bohemians in America. The Chautauquan. Meadville.
    14:55-60. Oct., 1891.

---- Christmas Day and how it is celebrated in old Bohemia. Illustrated
    by E. V. Nádherný. Christmas number Herald. New York. Dec. 12, 1897.

Census of the U. S. As a country of birth Bohemia has appeared at every
    census from 1870 to 1900. See Bulletin of Population: 1910, pp.
    959-61-68-69-70-75-85-86-89-90-91-92-1012.

Davis, Catherine B. Modern Conditions of Agriculture in Bohemia.
    Journal of Political Economy. Chicago. 8:491. 1907.

Hrbkova, Šárka B. Bohemian Citizens have done much for Cedar Rapids.
    Illustrated. Semi-Centennial edition of The Cedar Rapids
    Republican. June 10, 1906.

---- The Immigrant. Nebraska State Journal. Lincoln. May 29, 1910.

---- The Melting Pot. The Daily Star. Lincoln. Feb., 1914.

---- Bohemians in Nebraska. The Bohemian Review. Chicago. 1:10-4. July,
    1917.

Hrdlička, Aleš. Bohemia and the Czechs. Illustrated. The National
    Geographic Magazine. Washington. 31:163-87. Feb., 1917.

Industrial Census of Bohemia. Scientific American Supplement. New York.
    55:22907. May 23, 1903.

Jonáš, Charles, late U. S. Consul to Prague. Bohemian and Hungarian
    Emigration to the United States. U. S. Consular Reports. 32:491-94.
    1890.

---- Bohemians in Chicago. Preface by ---- to page article.
    Illustrated. The Chicago Sunday Times. Jan. 24, 1892.

Kissner, J. G. The Catholic Church and Bohemian Immigrants. Charities.
    New York. 13:313-14. Dec., 1904.

Kohlbeck, Valentine. The Bohemian Element. Short History of the
    Bohemian Catholic Congregations in Chicago. The New World. Chicago.
    Pp. 136-40. Apr., 1900.

---- The Catholic Bohemians in the United States. Champlain Educator.
    25:36-54. Jan., Mar., 1906; same, Mt. Angel Magazine. Oregon. Jan.,
    Feb., 1909.

Kotouč, Otto. The Bohemian Settlement at Humboldt in, A History of
    Richardson County (Neb.). 1917.

Komenský Club of Columbia University, New York. Memorial. 16 pp.
    English and Bohemian. Apr. 21, 1917.

Koukol, Alois B. A Slav’s a Man for A’ That. Illustrated. Charities and
    Commons. New York. 21:589-98. Jan., 1902.

Kučera, Magdalena. The Slavic Races in Cleveland. Charities. New York.
    13:777-78. Jan., 1905.

McLaughlin, Allan. The Slavic Immigrant. Popular Science Monthly. New
    York. 63:30-32. May, 1903.

Masaryk, Alice Garrigue. The Bohemians in Chicago. A Sketch. Charities.
    New York. 13:206-11. Dec. 3, 1904.

---- Thomas Garrigue. The Labor Academy of Bohemia. A new feature of
    the labor question. Translated by Josefa Humpal-Zeman for the
    Chicago Record. Public Opinion. London. 22:203-04. Feb. 18, 1897.

Mashek, Nan. Bohemian Farmers in Wisconsin. Charities. New York.
    13:211-14. Dec. 3, 1904.

Miller, Kenneth D. Bohemians in Texas. The Bohemian Review. Chicago.
    1:4-5. May, 1917.

Robbins, Jane E. The Bohemian Women in New York: Their work as cigar
    makers. Home work among them. Charities. New York. 13:194-96. Dec.
    3, 1904.

Ross, E. A. Slavs in America. Illustrated. Century Magazine. New York.
    88:590-98. Aug., 1914.

Rudiš-Jičínský, J. Bohemians in Linn County. Linn County Atlas. Iowa
    Publishing Co. Davenport. 1907.

Schauffler, H. A. Slavonic Populations in the United States.
    Evangelical Alliance. 89:248.

Steiner, E. A. Character of the Bohemians in the U. S. Outlook. New
    York. 73:968-72. Apr. 25, 1903.

Švarc, Václav. The Culture which the Slav offers America. The
    handicraft and industrial exhibition conducted by the Slavic
    Alliance in Cleveland. Illustrated. Charities. New York. 14:875-81.
    July 1, 1905.

Swehla, Francis J. The Bohemians in Central Kansas. Portraits. Map.
    Kansas Historical Society Collections. 13:469-512. Topeka. 1915.

Turner, R. W. Emigration from Bohemia. U. S. Consular Reports.
    32:343-44. Feb., 1890.

Vlach, J. J. Our Bohemian Population. Proceedings of the State
    Historical Society of Wisconsin. Pp. 159-62. Madison. 1902.

Zeman, Josephine Humpal. The Bohemian People in Chicago, pp. 115-28.
    In, Hull House Maps and Papers. A presentation of nationalities
    and wages in a congested district of Chicago. By residents of Hull
    House. T. Y. Crowell & Co. New York. 1895.

---- Bohemian Settlements in the United States. Industrial Commission.
    15:507-10. 1901.

---- Bohemia: A Stir of its Social Conscience. The Commons. New York.
    July, 1904.




XXII

THE SOKOLS


PUBLICATIONS

Tyrš, Miroslav. Historical Sketch and Introduction to the foundations
    of Gymnastics. Translated from the original manuscript by J.
    Rudiš-Jičínský. 28 pp. National Printing & Publishing Co. Chicago.
    1914.

---- Our Task, Aim and Goal. Translated by J. Rudiš-Jičínský. 32 pp.


ARTICLES

Baker, James. The Historical and Athletic Fêtes at Prague. Queen
    Magazine. London. July 13, 1912.

---- The Sokol Festival at Prague. Illustrated London News. July 13,
    1912.

---- Woman’s Work in the Famous Sokol Organization. Queen Magazine.
    London. Aug. 3, 1912.

---- The Palacký and Sokol Commemoration at Prague. Author’s Magazine.
    London. Oct., 1912.

---- National Renaissance and its Motive Power. The Sokol Organization
    of the Slavs. Illustrated. Review of Reviews. London. 47:369-71.
    Apr., 1913.

Jerrold, Walter Copeland. The Bohemian Sokol. Fortnightly Review.
    London and New York. 94:347-58. Aug., 1913.




XXIII

TRAVEL. DESCRIPTION. GEOGRAPHY


PUBLICATIONS

Absolon, K. and Sýkora, A. J. Description in Bohemian, German, French,
    Russian, Polish, Slovene and English of the Moravský Kras (Moravian
    Carso), particularly the far-famed chasm Macocha in Moravia, near
    Brno. 40 illustrations. The Moravian Union for promoting visits of
    foreigners. Brno. Moravia. 1904.

Baker, James. Pictures from Bohemia. Drawn with Pen and Pencil.
    Drawings by Walter Crane, H. Whatley and the best Bohemian artists.
    4º. 192 pp. The Religious Tract Society. London. 1894.

---- Austria: Her People and Their Homelands. 48 illustrations by
    Donald Maxwell. 8º. 310 pp. John Lane. London. 1913.

---- Days Afoot and European Sketches. 4º. Simpkins, Marshall & Co.
    London.

Bird, A. F. R. Boating in Bavaria, Austria and Bohemia. 4º. Andrews,
    Hull. 1893.

Clark, Francis E. Old Homes of New Americans. The Country and the
    People of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy and their contribution to
    the New World. With illustrations from photographs. 8º. 266 pp.
    Bohemians, pp. 10-58. Houghton Mifflin Company. New York. 1913.

Cole, G. A. J. The Gypsy Road. A Journey from Krakow to Coblentz.
    Illustrated by Edmund H. New. 8º. 166 pp. Macmillan & Co. London
    and New York. 1894.

Cyclists Touring Club. Continental Road Book. V. 3. Maps. London. 1901.

Damberger, Christian Frederick. Travels in Bohemia between the years
    1781 and 1797. Translated from the German. London.

Dominian, Leon. Linguistic Areas in Europe: Their Boundaries and
    Political Significance. Maps. Reprint from the Bulletin of the
    American Geographical Society. New York. 47:6. June, 1915.

---- The Frontiers of Language and Nationality in Europe. 20 Maps.
    Bohemian, Moravian, and Slovakian, pp. 141-53. Henry Holt and Co.
    New York. 1917.

Doughty, Henry Montague. Our Wherry in Wendish Lands from Friesland
    through the Mecklenburg lakes to Bohemia. 4 maps and 89
    illustrations. 8º. 406 pp. Jarrold and Sons. London. 1893.

Gleig, Georg Robert. Germany, Bohemia and Hungary visited in 1837. 3
    vs. Bohemia and Moravia, pp. 272-372. John W. Parker. London. 1839.

Handbook for Travellers in South Germany and Austria: being a guide
    to Würtemberg, Bavaria, Austria, Tyrol, Salzburg, Styria, the
    Austrian and Bavarian Alps, and the Danube from Ulm to the Black
    Sea. With maps and plans. Bohemia, Moravia and Gallicia (!), pp.
    472-528. 8º. John Murray. London. 1879.

Hodgson, Randolph L. On Plain and Peak. Sporting and other sketches of
    Bohemia and Tyrol. Illustrated by Princess Mary Thurn and Taxis and
    from photos. 8º. 254 pp. A. Constable & Co. London. 1898.

Keysler, Johann Georg. Travels through Germany, Bohemia, Hungary, etc.
    Translated from the German. Bohemia, v. 4, p. 247. Printed for A.
    Linde in Catherine Street. London. 1760.

Kohl, Johann Georg. Austria, Vienna, Hungary, Bohemia and the Danube,
    Galicia, Styria, Moravia, Bukovina and the Military Frontier. From
    the German. 8º. London. 1843. Philadelphia. 1844.

Macdonald, James. Glimpses of Bohemia, Past and Present. 8º. 55 pp. 1
    plate. Lorimer & Gillies. Edinburgh. 1882.

Meynier, H. The Tradesman’s Travels in Germany, Silesia and Bohemia.
    London. 1805-1807.

Moryson (or Morison), Fynes. An itinerary written by ----. First in the
    Latin Tongue, and then translated by him into English. Containing
    his ten yeeres travell through the twelve dominions of Germany,
    Böhmerland, Switzerland, Netherland, Denmark, Poland, Italy,
    Turkey, France, England, Scotland, and Ireland. 3 vs. J. Beale.
    London. 1617.

Niederle, Lubor. Geographical and statistical views of the contemporary
    Slav peoples. Smithsonian Report 1910, pp. 509-612. Extracted by
    Aleš Hrdlička, from Niederle’s Slovanský Svět (Slavic World).
    Government Printing Office. Washington. 1911.

Patin, Charles. Travels through Germany, Bohemia, Switzerland, Holland
    and other parts of Europe; describing the most considerable citys,
    and the palaces of Princes.... Made in English and illustrated.
    12º. London. 1696. Another edition. 1701.

Salvo, Marquis Carlo de. Travels in the year 1806 from Italy to England
    through the Tyrol, Styria, Bohemia, Galicia, Poland and Livonia ...
    containing particulars of the liberation of Mrs. Spencer Smith from
    the hands of the French police. Translated from the Italian by W.
    Fraser. 12º. London. 1807.

Silesia. An Autumn in Silesia, Austria Proper, and the Ober Enns. By
    the author of Travels in Bohemia. 8º. London. 1859.

Stoddard, J. L. Lectures. Illustrated. Bohemia, supple. v. 5, pp.
    237-328. Geo. L. Shuman & Co. Chicago and Boston. 1913.

Taylor, Bayard. Views A-Foot; or Europe seen with Knapsack and Staff.
    Scenes in Prague, pp. 140-55. George P. Putnam. New York. 1850.

Travels through Germany, Bohemia, Switzerland, Holland, and other parts
    of Europe in 1756. Also, Travels in the year 1806 through Bohemia.
    No particulars as to author or publisher.

[Illustration: Antonín Dvořák]

Travels in Bohemia; with a walk through the Highlands of Saxony. By an
    Old Traveller (Thomas Brown of Edinburgh?). V. 1, 341 pp; v. 2, 397
    pp. 8º. Guildford (printed). London. 1857.

Vizetelly, E. A. In Seven Lands: Germany, Austria, Hungary, Bohemia,
    Spain, Portugal, Italy. 16 illustrations. 8º. 393 pp. Chatto and
    Windus. London. 1916.

White, Walter. A July Holiday in Saxony, Bohemia and Silesia. 8º. 305
    pp. Chapman and Hall. London. 1857.


ARTICLES

Baker, James. Round about Haida, Bohemia. Cornhill Magazine. London.
    June, 1885.

---- Undiscovered Bohemia. Saturday Review. London. 62:48; same,
    American Architect. Boston, 20:101. 1886.

---- At the Oybin, Bohemia. Cornhill Magazine. London. Aug., 1886.

---- At Bosig, Bohemia. Gentleman’s Magazine. London. Apr., 1887.

---- Why not Bohemia? Illustrated by H. Whatley. Illustrated London
    News. London. Pp. 203, 218. Aug. 17, 1889.

---- Schreckenstein, the Key of the Elbe (Labe). Gentleman’s Magazine.
    July, 1890.

---- A Pompeii in Bohemia. Cornhill Magazine. London. Jan., 1891; same,
    Living Age. Boston. 188:617. 1891.

---- Some Rock Towns and Castles of Bohemia. Times. London. Oct. 23,
    26, 1893.

---- A Visit to Peter Payne’s Prison. Leisure Hour. London. Dec., 1894.

---- In the Haida District. Sunday At Home. London. Apr., 1897.

---- Prachatice, a Perfect Mediæval Town. Leisure Hour. London. Sept.,
    1898.

---- An Ancient Treasure Town--Kutná Hora. Sunday At Home. London. May,
    1901.

---- English Writers and Journalists in Bohemia. Author’s Magazine.
    London. 1905-08; same, Publisher’s Circular. London. July 15, 1905;
    same, Times and Mirror. July 21, 28, 1908; same, Author. London.
    Oct., 1908.

---- In a Bohemian Cottage. Queen Magazine. London. Aug. 12, 1911.

Bohemia: Manners, Fashion and Things in General. A Summer Tour.
    Fraser’s Magazine. London. 21:425. Apr., 1840.

Bohemian School Master. Household Words. London. 3:496. 1851.

Bohemian Forest. Cornhill Magazine. London. 50-257-72. 1884.

Brinton, Christian. Midsummer in Bohemia. Illustrated by Alfons M.
    Mucha. Appleton’s Magazine. New York. 8:131-38. Aug., 1906.

Farnham, Amos W. The Land of Bohemia. The Vocationist. Oswego. 2:4.
    June, 1914.

Kopta, Flora P. Peasant Life in Bohemia. Southern Magazine. Louisville.
    5:394.

Macdonald, James. A Visit to Moravia and Bohemia. The Catholic
    Presbyterian. London. 3:446-55. Dec., 1881.

Midsummer Eve in Bohemia. Once a Week. London. 11:54-6. 1864.

Mud-Larking in Bohemia. Temple Bar. London. 84:371. 1888.

Nedobyty, Anna. Bohemia Revisited. Illustrated. Overland Monthly. San
    Francisco. 39:776-81. Apr., 1902.

Rae, W. Fraser. Life at Bohemian Baths. Blackwood’s Magazine.
    Edinburgh. 148:515-29. Oct., 1890.

Reminiscences of a Ride in a Schnell Wagon. Fraser’s Magazine. London.
    31:433. 1845.

Street, G. S. Visit to Bohemia. People. London. 275-301; same,
    Fortnightly Review. New York. 93:541-53. Mar., 1910; same, Living
    Age. Boston. 265:86-95. Apr. 9, 1910.

Walk Across Bohemia. Fraser’s Magazine. London. 29:290-301. 1884.

The Travels of Three English Gentlemen, in the Year 1734. A Journey
    from Vienna in Austria; to Prague, the Capital of Bohemia. The
    Harleian Miscellany; or, a Collection of Scarce, curious and
    entertaining Pamphlets and Tracts, as well in Manuscript as
    in Print, found in the late Earl of Oxford’s Library. London.
    5:338-65; 8:222-24. 1810-11.




XXIV

BOHEMIA IN BRITISH STATE PAPERS AND MANUSCRIPTS


In the compilation of the material here given the authors have consulted
and drawn from the following sources:

_Close Rolls_, preserved in the Public Record Office; _Calendar of the
Patent Rolls_; _Calendar of entries in the Papal Registers_ relating to
Great Britain and Ireland; _Letters and Papers Foreign and Domestic of
the reign of Henry VIII._, preserved in the Public Record Office, the
British Museum and elsewhere in England; _Calendar of State Papers_, of
the reign of successive English Kings; _Rolls of Parliament_, comprising
the Petitions, Pleas and Proceedings of Parliament from A.D. 1278 to
A.D. 1503; _Journal of the House of Lords_, compiled by the direction
of the Lords Committee for the _Journal_; _Collection of the State
Papers of John Thurloe_ (Thurlow), Secretary first to the Council of
State, and afterwards to the two Protectors Oliver and Richard Cromwell,
being Authentic Memorials of the English Affairs from the Year 1638 to
the Restoration of King Charles II.; _Papers relating to John Drury’s
Mission to the Continent_; _Reports of the British Historical Manuscripts
Commission_; _Reports of the Royal Commission on Historical Manuscripts_.

From the mass of references to Bohemia which one finds stored in the
_Calendar of State Papers_, the authors have practically noted only such
as have some bearing on the relationship between that country and England.

England’s most genuine concern in Bohemia dates to the first quarter of
the seventeenth century, when Elizabeth Stuart had been called to guide
the state affairs of the ancient Kingdom. “Elizabeth Stuart, Queen of
Bohemia” occupies a leading place in every index to the _Calendar of State
Papers_.

Certain school histories would make it appear that it was Austria and
Austria alone which combated the Turkish invasion of southeastern Europe.
A perusal of the reports which English ambassadors sent home from various
posts on the continent, make it clear that the Bohemian State contributed
its full share, in men and in treasure toward crushing the Turkish menace.
It is well worth recalling in this connection, that the present Hapsburg
monarchy really originated as a result of a voluntary union entered into
in 1526 between Austria, Bohemia and Hungary. United we stand, divided we
fall before the Turkish peril, was the chief argument used to effect the
union of these three states.

1302, Nov. 10. Westminster. Safe-conduct, until Easter, for Gotfried,
chaplain and envoy of the King of Bohemia and Poland, returning home.
Patent Rolls, v. 1301-1307, p. 72.

1302, Nov. 13. Westminster. To Wenceslaus king of Bohemia and Poland.
The king has received his letters of credence presented by Godfrey,
Wenceslaus’ chaplain, the bearer of the presents, and he understands what
the chaplain wished to say to him on Wenceslauses behalf. He has caused
the relics of St. Thomas, sometime archbishop of Canterbury, which the
chaplain prayed on Wenceslauses behalf might be sent by the king, and
also other relics be sent by the chaplain to Wenceslaus whom he prays to
receive them and to have and keep in fitting reverence. Close Rolls, v.
1296-1302, p. 611.

1339, Dec. 3. Antwerp. Whereas of late when the king was passing with
his army through France certain enemies of the household of the king of
Bohemia lying in ambush attacked the king’s clerks, William de Dalton and
William de Hugate, parsons of the churches of Southdalton and Northburton,
took them and brought them against their will to High Almain, where they
detain them in captivity, to the king’s distress, he requests the provost
of Beverley, his officers and ministers and all others interested to be
favorable and gracious to the prisoners in those matters wherein they
have to do with them, not seeking occasion against them in respect of
their beneficies or the fruits thereof, and pardoning William de Dalton if
during the present impediment he be not ordained to the orders which his
benefice requires. Same, v. 1338-40, p. 400.

1346, Sept. Rome. To John, King of Bohemia. Exhorting him to assist
certain nuncios in their mission, and to interpose in the interests
of peace between the Kings of France and England. Calendar of Papal
Registers, v. 7, p. 28.

1354, Dec. 2. Westminster. Protection and Safe conduct, until Michaelmas,
for John le Hammer of Boemia, who lately came to England on business
affecting the King, who is going back to his own parts with three Knights
and their grooms, and returning with thirty six Knights and their grooms,
horses, armour, goods and things. Patent Rolls, v. 1354-58, p. 132.

1354. Enrolment of indenture made between the King (of England) and Master
John Hanner and Herman de Reynesthorp of Boem, mynours (miners). The King
has committed to John and Herman his mines in Devonshire and elsewhere
in England, rendering to the King the tenth part of their receipts and
profits both of gold and silver and of lead and copper extracted from
those mines. Same, v. 1354-60, p. 98.

1381, May 1. Westminster. Grant of life annuities at the Exchequer to the
following, whom the King has retained to stay with him for life, they
doing homage therefor: Peter de Wartemberg, Knight, master of the chamber
of the King’s brother, the King of the Romans and Bohemia, 250 marks.
Same, v. 1381-85, p. 4.

1382, March 14. Westminster. Gives to Simon de Burle, Kings Knight,
certain grants for life, as recompense of his labor and expense in
journeying to Germany and Bohemia to conduct the King’s consort to
England. Same, v. 1381-85, p. 107.

1385, May 21. Westminster. Grant to the King’s esquire Roger Siglem of
Bohemia, for his habitation, of a tenement at the corner of a lane called
Wyndgooslane. Same, v. 1381-85, p. 107.

1388. Simon de Burley impeached for retaining sundry Bohemians in the
King’s household. Rolls of Parliament, v. 3, 242a.

1388. Chancellor, etc., to warn such Bohemians as are not retained in the
Queen’s service, to void the Realm. Same, v. 3, 247a.

1388. Duke of Norfolk banished the Realm, and ordered to abide only in
Almain, Hungary, and Bohemia. Same, v. 3, 383b.

1398, Oct. 3. Westminster. Licence for the king’s lieges Thomas Gray of
Heton, knight, William Elmham, knight, George Felbrigg, knight, Richard
Craddock, knight, Richard Burgh, John Lancastre, Thomas de Brunham, Thomas
Yokflete, clerk, and John Rome, clerk, to be of the entire and continous
council of Thomas, duke of Norfolk, going to stay in Almain, Bohemia and
Hungary. Same, v. 1396-99, p. 422.

1418, Mar. Constance. To the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the
Bishops of London, Rochester, Chichester, Winchester, Exeter, Lincoln,
Bath and Wells, Salisbury, Worcester, Hereford, Coventry, Lichfield,
Norwich, Ely, St. Davids, St. Asoph, Llandoff, Bangor, Durham, Carlisle
and Candida Casa, and inquisitors of heresy in the provinces of Canterbury
and York. Condemnation of the errors of John Wickleff of England, John
Huss of Bohemia and Jerome of Prague; Form for examining heretics and
suspected heretics, etc. Calendar of Papal Registers, v. 7, p. 22.

1427, April. Rome. To Henry, Cardinal priest of St. Eusebius’s, papal
legate. The Pope has from time to time sent divers nuncios and legates for
the extirpation of heresy in Bohemia and neighbouring parts, but without
result, nevertheless, he does not lose hope, and daily prays that the
sick flocks may be healed of their leprosy or be cut off from the land
of the living, lest with their contagion they infect others. As the most
fitting leader of the attack on heresy and the defense of the church,
to convert or do battle with the heretics, the pope has singled out the
cardinal for many reasons, his wisdom and prudence, as shown formerly (at
Constance) in the matter of the union of the church, his high lineage,
his experience of great affairs, the glory of the realm and nation, which
will make him the more to be feared in war. The pope has therefore made
him legate a latere throughout all Germany and the realms of Hungary
and Bohemia, and urges him not to refuse to undertake the burden. The
enterprise will bring great and lasting glory to the King of England; etc.
Same, v. 7, p. 30.

1427, July. Rome. To Henry, Cardinal of England, legate of the Apostolic
see. The Pope rejoiced to receive his letters dated at Mechlin on the 15
of last month containing that he had undertaken the office of legate and
is hastening against the Bohemians. Same, v. 7, p. 34.

1427, Oct. Rome. To Henry, Cardinal of England, legate of the apostolic
see. The pope has with grief heard, from the legates chancellor, Nicholas
Bildeston, of the disgraceful flight of the army of the faithful in
Bohemia Aug. 2, 1427, from the siege of Meis (Stříbro) to Tachau (Tachov)
where it was met by the legate, and from Tachau to the frontier on Aug.
4. He commends the cardinal for promptly betaking himself to Bohemia, and
for his efforts with the princes and the army. The cardinal must persevere
with his enterprise, and is to strive in season and out of season with
the princes and prelates of Almain. The clergy and prelates of Almain,
the archbishops of Cologne and Mainz if they had joined those in Bohemia
as they ought, and as had been arranged, the army would not have retreated
with such disgrace. Same, v. 7, p. 35.

1429. Kingdom of Bohemia destroyed through Infidelity. Rolls of
Parliament, v. 4, p. 335.

1518, Mar. 19. London. Ratification by Henry VIII. with Charles King of
Spain, as principal contrahent, of the treaty of London, including his
allies, Bohemia among them. V. 3, p. 40.

1524, Jan. 20. Greenwich. Henry VIII. to Frederick, John, and George,
Dukes of Saxony. His (Luthers) doctrine is like that of Wycliffe, which,
he doubts not, they abhor, as German Princes and their progenitors
endeavoured to exterminate it, and have confined it to Bohemia. Feels sure
they will prevent it from flooding Saxony and the whole of Germany. V. 4,
part 1, p. 17.

1527, Jan. 12. Sir John Wallop to Wolsey. It is thought the King of
Bohemia is sending Salamanka to ask the King of England for aid against
the Turk. Thinks he intends first to make himself King of Hungary. V. 4,
part 2, p. 1249.

[Illustration: Count Francis Lützow

Pioneer worker in English Bohemica]

1527, May 20. Pressell, in Silesia. Wallop to Wolsey. I assure your Grace
that I was not in all my journey so well entreatid, as I was with Hym
(King of Bohemia) and his nobles. Howe be it, me thowght afore I was as
well entreatid as cowde be, but this chere was so goode and with so goode
hartes, that I cannott write to moche thereof. And also presentes was
geven to me, not allone by the King Hym selfe, but also by his nobles.
Over all this tyll I came into the King of Beemes contrey,

I lay every nyght yn the Kinges castelles, or some of his noble mennys,
all waies well providid for. As towching newes, I have none of any
certainte, but that the King of Beeme departithe frome hens the 21th
day of this moneth towarde Prage, there to tary 7 other 8 daies att the
ferdest, and fro thens to departe to Vienne where he entendith to putt
Hym in a redynes to invade the royalme of Hungarie. And the likelyhode is
grete as I before tyme in my laste letters have written to your Grace,
for the Beemes have promysed Hym 6000 fotemenn and 1000 horsmenn; The
Moraviens 3000 fotemenn and 500 horsmenn; and the Slesiens 2000 fotemenn
and oone thowsond horsmenn, the space of half an yere. V. 6, part 5, pp.
581-82.

1536, Feb. 8. Reginald Pole to Gasper Cardinal Contarini. Writes to
commend Peter Bechimius, of Bohemia. Is pleased that he is looking for his
writings. Asks him to read like an enemy, not like a friend. Will send
immediately the portion about the authority of the Pope, and will not
cease to work at the rest. Hears that Peter the Bohemian has delayed his
journey, and still has Pole’s letters to the Cardinal. V. 10, p. 101.

1544, Aug. 16. Antwerp. Stephen Van Hassenpergk, a gentleman of Moravia,
to whom Henry, with his accustomed liberality has given something in his
realm, fears to be hindered in the enjoyment and receipt of it, and asks
her (Queen of Hungary) to write in his favour; which both for his virtues
and because he is her subject as dowager of the Kingdom of Bohemia, she
cannot refuse, and therefore begs Henry to give orders to his officers and
subjects therein. V. 19, part 2, p. 37.

1554, April 6 and 12. Switzerland. Extracts of letters from the French
Ambassador ----. King Ferdinand has sent to levy 4,000 horse in Bohemia
and a number more in Hungary (against the Turk).... Last Friday, the
Ambassadors of the Kings of Bohemia and the Romans left England.... V. 18,
p. 92.

1556, March 29. Bruxelles. Masone to Devonshire. Foreign News. The King’s
journey to England deferred by reason of a visit from the King of Bohemia.
V. 1547-80, p. 77.

1559, Jan. 17. Gottorp. Adolf, Duke of Holstein, to the Queen. Desires her
licence for Joachim Bekeman, Henry of Czevona, and John Militor to export
from England to Bohemia and Poland each of them 500 white clothes of the
sort called “Wilser et Westerlaken,” to be purchased by them from the
weavers at Blackwall hall. V. 1559-60, p. 202.

1578, June 1. Grenwich. The Queen to the Princes of the Empire, professing
the Augsburg Confession. We therefore earnestly pray You that certain
delegates from various regions in Scotland, France, some of the provinces
of Belgium, Poland, Bohemia, and elsewhere, who invoke Jesus Christ, may
be peaceably joined in a common council, to consider of the common cause.
V. 1583, p. 512.

1619, May 8. Lord Doncaster has set out for Bohemia, his expenses will be
£30,000. V. 10, p. 44.

1619, Oct. 2. Sir Horace Vere to Carleton. Great longing for news of the
King of Bohemia’s coronation. Much suing for the command of the troops to
go to Bohemia, but his Majesty has not yet resolved to send any. V. 10, p.
82.

1619, Oct. 5. Thos. Locke to Carleton. Greater difficulty than ever
in getting money. It is thought that letters from Bohemia must be
intercepted in the way, they are so long in coming. V. 10, p. 83.

1619, Oct. 11. The general loans will not supply the Bohemian wants. V.
10, p. 557.

1619, Nov. 21. A gentleman has arrived from the King and Queen of Bohemia,
to announce their arrival at Prague; their coronation is fixed for the
25th and the 26th. V. 10, p. 97.

1620, Jan. 18. Sir Fras. Nethersole to (Carleton). To be zealous in the
cause of Bohemia is thought a fault in the eyes of those that govern. V.
10, p. 113.

1620, Feb. 20. Sir Fras. Nethersole to ----. The King commanded Baron
Dona to prepare an answer to the Spanish minister’s information that the
Crown of Bohemia was only elective of heirs male, and that Ferdinand’s
deposition was unlawful. His answer to the first part was conclusive and
he is sent to prepare one to the second. He was sanguine at first, from
the zeal of the Prince, Buckingham and others, as to obtaining substantial
aid, but the King, unwilling to call a Parliament, sits still, seeing what
will be done without him; he even refused to second the King of Bohemia’s
request to the City of London for a loan of £100,000. V. 10, p. 124.

1620, Feb. 26. Chamberlain to Carleton. Sir And. Gray has made suit to be
allowed to raise 2,000 volunteers for Bohemia. V. 10, p. 125.

1620, Mar. 11. Chamberlain to Carleton. Drums beat for recruits for the
King of Bohemia. V. 10, p. 129.

1620, Mar. 21. Sir Fras. Nethersole to (Carleton). The City of London
would contribute freely to the Bohemian cause, if they could have some
warrant from the King or Council that they would not afterwards be blamed
for it. V. 10, p. 132.

1620, April (10?). Sir Jas. Wolveridge to Lord Zouch. Thanks for good
tidings of the progress of the war in Bohemia; trusts that party will
avenge the death of Jan Huss and Jerome of Prague, etc. V. 10, p. 138.

1620, Apr. 28. List of Dr. John Lambe of contributions in Rothwell Deanery
to the aid for the King of Bohemia. V. 10, p. 140.

1620, May 15. Rich. Stockwell to (Dr. Lambe). Sends up certain moneys,
among which is £62 4s. collected for the King of Bohemia. V. 10, p. 145.

1620, May 18. List of contributions from thirty two parishers in
Leicestershire, for the King of Bohemia. V. 10, p. 146.

1620, June 1. Memo. by the Bp. of Peterborough, of the receipt of
acquittances for £100, as part of the collection made in the diocese for
Bohemia. V. 10, p. 149.

1620, June 14. Sir Richard Younge to Lord Zouch. Embassies preparing to
mediate a peace for the King of Bohemia. V. 10, p. 152.

1620, June 15. Account of Rich. Lightfoot, Rector of Stoke-Bruerne, co.
Northampton, of contributions from his parish for the Bohemian loan, with
receipt of £10. V. 10, p. 152.

1620, June 15. Account of Rich. Lightfoot, Rector of Stoke-Bruerne, co.
Northampton, of contributions from his parish for the Bohemian loan, with
receipt of £10 16s., the amount thereof, by Dr. John Lambe.--Memorandum by
Wm. Jones, Parson of Syresham, of his contribution of 20s., towards the
benevolence for Bohemia. Hopes to be excused more, not being rich.--List
of contributions to the collections for Bohemia, by the clergy of
different parishes, in the diocese of Peterborough, with the names of
many of the clergy; total £77 14s.--Seven papers of memoranda relative to
payments for the Bohemian loan in the diocese of Peterborough. V. 10, p.
152.

1620, June 28. Chamberlain to Carleton. The levies for Bohemia continue,
but the recruits come in slowly and there are great jealousies about the
appointment of officers. V. 10, p. 15.

1620, July 29. Examination of Simon Weston. Said in his Speech in the
County Hall at Stafford, when urging the benevolence of Bohemia that Henry
III. and Henry IV. of France were murdered by Jesuits. V. 10, p. 169.

1620, Sept. 14. Baron Achatius de Dona, Bohemian Ambassador, to Lord
Zouch. Requests his aid toward levying the contribution there for Bohemia.
Incloses, the same to the Mayors, etc., of the Cinque Ports. Their
Majesties of Bohemia requiring aid in maintaining their just cause. V. 10,
p. 177.

1620, Sept. 16. Chamberlain to Carleton. Baron Dona is most arrogant in
demeanour; he made a progress in Buckinghamshire to Lady Darmers and Lady
Tresham’s, and founded a counter contribution to that of Bohemia. V. 10,
p. 178.

1620, Oct. 7. Mayor of Sandwich to Nicholas. Sends £153 11s., collected
for the Bohemian wars in the town. V. 10, p. 183.

1620, Nov. 9. Chamberlain to Carleton. His Majesty expects those who have
already subscribed for Bohemia to contribute again. V. 10, p. 191.

1620, Nov. 11. Examination of Hen. Foxwell, of Baltonsborough, Co.
Somerset. Meant, by the expression in his letter to Mrs. Fitzjames, of
Charlton, that “the taking of Bohemia and Palatinate would be to the good
of the Church, the good of the Roman Catholic Church.” V. 10, p. 191.

1620, Nov. 27. Submission of Jos. Maxwell, addressed to the Council,
acknowledging and retracting his error in presuming to determine that
the Kingdom of Bohemia is not elective, and that therefore the recent
deposition of one king and the election of another is unlawful. Will
publish his retraction, if Baron Dona wishes it. V. 10, p. 194.

1620, Dec. 13. Difficulty in collecting the contribution for Bohemia. The
City (London) would rather give £5,000 from the common stock, than £5 from
their separate purses. V. 10, p. 199.

1621, Jan. 26. Jos. Maxwell to the Council. Repeats his penitence and
submission for his pamphlet on Bohemia. V. 10, p. 216.

1621, Apr. 18. Chamberlain to (Carleton). News of the loss of Bohemia,
submission of Hungary, etc. V. 10, p. 248.

1621, Aug. 12. Articles of misdemeanor charged against Sir Robt. Bendloss,
that he declared the King was of no religion; dissuaded the benevolence
for the King of Bohemia as a dangerous precedent. V. 10, p. 283.

1621, Nov. 24. Chamberlain to Carleton. The Lord Treasurer spoke (in
Parliament) of the poverty of the Exchequer, the King having himself spent
£211,000 on the Bohemian war, besides £34,000 given by the nobility and
£70,000 by the Commons. V. 1619-23, p. 312.

1622, July 23. Memo. of the payments by Art. Jarvis, collector of the
gifts of the laity, to the aid of the King and Queen of Bohemia. V. 10, p.
429.

1622, Oct. 12. Bailiff and Jurats of Lydd to Lord Zouch. Have collected
such moneys as were freely given toward the contribution for the King of
Bohemia. V. 10, p. 454.

1622, Oct. 29. Mayor of Sandwich to Lord Zouch. Has received, since the
last payments made £10 11s. 10d. from Brightlingsea, co. Essex, towards
the contribution for Bohemia. V. 10, p. 458.

1624, Mar. 1. Observations on the proceedings with Spain, since the
commencement of the Bohemian war, in reference to the Palatinate, etc. V.
11, p. 174.

1624, July (?). Prayer for the King and Queen of Bohemia and their affairs
to be used by the English companies abroad, after the prayer for the King.
V. 11, p. 319.

1624, Dec. 10. Lord Cham. Pembroke to Carleton. Though proceedings are
slow, the King will prove to the world his affection to the cause. Thinks
the present war had better be styled a war for the Kingdom of Bohemia than
for religion. Never saw the Kingdom so affectionate for any business, etc.
V. 11, p. 404.

1626, Feb. (?). News Letter from Flanders containing interesting details
respecting the Pope, Emperor and King of Spain, the state of Bohemia, etc.
Found among the Conway Papers. V. 1625-49, p. 722. Add.

1630. Project for a trade to be made from England to the lower parts of
Germany, Hungary, Bohemia, Slavonia, Croatia, Carinthia, Styria, Tyrol,
Morlacca and other countries. V. 1629-31, p. 449.

1633, Sept. 10. Bohemian divines to the divines of Sion College, London.
Give a history of the Bohemian Church, and express their own desire for
unity. Noted in Laud’s handwriting, “Rece. Octob. 21. 1633. These letters
were delivered by some Bohemians to them of Sion College about the peace
between Lutherans and Calvinists, etc.” Papers Relating to John Drury’s
Mission to the Continent. Rep. 4, p. 160, part 1.

1635, July 18. Certified particular of the names of all such strangers
born as dwell within such parts of Middlesex as are adjacent to the city
of London. Among them is Jeremy Lefeaver, born in Bohemia, weaver. V.
1635, p. 283.

1635, Sept. 20. Return of all the strangers born at present inhabiting
within ward of Cripplegate Within: the total number was 23. In the parish
of St. Alban, Wood Street, dwelt Christopher Mecenere, a jeweller, born in
Bohemia. V. 1635, p. 389.

1648-1649. Treatise relative to the position and claims of the Elector
Palatine and the King of Bohemia so far as dependent upon the Emperor. It
is divided into paragraphs designated “considerations.” Under the 10th
“Consideration”: “To cover the cause of the (Thirty Years) war made for
religion, a desire for peace is everywhere pretended, but that which is
done proves more than that which is deceitfully conceived to the grief
and terror of Germany. The Bohemish cause might have been compounded by a
friendly treaty or decided by law, both which the Palatine always desired,
and it had been best for the Empire that it had been ended by law. It
might have been ended by arms in Bohemia, where the war began, etc.” V.
1648-49, pp. 398-99.

1654, July. Leszna, Poland. Peter Figulus (Komenský’s son-in-law), to
Samuel Hartlib in London. I cannot but bless the name of the Lord our God,
whenever I get something from you; for I see evidently, that God hath
chosen you long since to be an instrument in his hand, as for many other
his good works, so likewise to work a Godly comfort and edification in
our souls, whereof all your letters are full. The public letters which
were sent to you, are subscribed by baron Sadowsky, brother to him that
is in England. They are written in the name of all our exiled nation, and
directed to the lord protector, his highnes’s council, and the parliament.
The baron is a very good soldier, hath served long in the Swedish wars,
longs mightily for some help to the church of God grievously distressed
and afflicted in these quarters by the Papal and Austrian adherents,
being willing and resolved to spend himself, and do all what he can to
that end.... But he and we all leave the whole management of this affair
to the wisdom of the lord protector and his council. Perhaps they will
thereby be moved, or occasioned to take into a more serious deliberation
the case of our nation, and of us miserable exiles.... The emperor seeks
nothing but the suppression of the Gospel, and a dilatation of the
Austrian power. There is a monk lately converted to our religion, who
tells, that the emperor with the pope are resolved infallibly to make a
war against the protestants. All the cloisters have promised to such a war
to contribute each of them two soldiers and he tells, that they reckon
under the emperors dominions 96,000 cloisters or monasteries. But now
the exacerbation of minds increaseth by the most grievous persecution in
Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia and Austria. There are thousands of those, that
wait and pray to God for some Zyska, that would begin a religious war for
the protestant cause: yet none of the princes in Germany have the courage
to oppose themselves against the house of Austria. B. Sadowsky is fully
persuaded, that God would bless this enterprise thus seconded, and purely
directed to the glory of God and the relief of the oppressed; especially
if in the meantime the triumphant arms of the Commonwealth of England
permit not the Spaniards to assist the emperor.... My good Father Mons.
Comenius is once come again out of Hungary to us at Lesna; the Lord’s name
be praised for it. (Appended: Greeting in Latin by Comenius.) Collection
of the State Papers of John Thurloe.

1657, Nov. 4. In Council. The Petition of the pastors of several churches
of the Reformed religion in Higher Poland and Bohemia, now scattered
abroad by persecution, asking relief. V. 1657-58, p. 149.

1658, Mar. 25. Mr. Secretary reports his Highness’s approval of the
declaration for a collection for distressed Protestant churches in Poland,
with some additional clauses concerning 20 Protestant families hitherto
seated in Bohemia. V. 1657-58, p. 343.

1658, May 12. In Council. The Treasurers for money collected for the
Piedmontese Protestants to advance £500 for 20 Bohemian families, and
dispose it as the Committee for that affair shall direct. V. 1658-59, p.
21.

1658, June 24. In Council. Whereas on 15 June, for better transmission of
moneys collected for the distressed Protestant churches in Poland, and 20
families in Bohemia, it was agreed between Sam. Hartman and Paul Cyrillus,
agents for the churches, and Fredericus Krettechmarus (Kretchmar), agent
for the families that £400 should be paid to the families, and £50 to
their agent and the whole remainder to the Poland exiles. V. 1658-59, p.
76.

[Illustration: Thomas G. Masaryk

Portrait by Max Švabinský]

1658, July 6. In Council. The papers of request from Adam Samuel Hartman
and Paulus Cyrillus, the 2 Bohemian and Polonian agents, for an order to
issue from the Committee on Piedmont and Poland, for £100 to be paid them
from the money collected for the Protestants exiled from Poland, to buy 3
of the Bibles lately printed in the learned languages, etc. V. 1658-59, p.
89.

1668, Jan. 8. Warrant to the Treasury Commissioners to allow to Edw. Grey
a moiety of such moneys raised for the distressed inhabitants of Piedmont
and Bohemia, as shall be recivered by him. V. 1667-68, p. 161.

1669, Apr. 28. Petition of Wenceslaus Libanus[18] to the King, for the
living of St. Andrew’s, Walpole, co. Norfolk, value £100 a year. Was born
in Moravia, and is a member of the poor persecuted Bohemian churches; has
been tossed up and down the world for 40 years, and afterwards brought
to England, where having attained a knowledge of the English tongue, he
put himself in holy orders, and has been a constant preacher in co. Herts
for 5 years as a curate. Annexing, Certificate by Dr. John Durel, that
Wenceslaus Libanus, a priest of the Church of England, is a learned and
sober man, and a very good preacher. V. 1668-69, p. 311.

  [18] This Libanus is no other than Waclaw Libanus, whom Komenský ordained
  as an acolyte of the Unity at the Synod held at Leszno (Poland) Oct. 14,
  1638. Libanus lived for some time in exile in Hungary. _Korrespondence
  Jana Amose Komenského._ V. 2, pp. 182, 194.

Letter from Her Majesty, the Queen of Bohemia to the Speaker of this
House, expressing her regret at the present Distractions of this Kingdom;
19 Car. I. VI. 15b. 17a. Another Letter from the Queen to the Speaker of
this House on the subject of Relief. 193b. Thanks to both Houses from
her. 17 Car. I. VI. 583a. Letter from the Lord General concerning the
making of some Provision for the Queen of Bohemia. 20 Car. I. VI. 583a.
Chaplain to be recommended to her. Resolution for charging £10,000 per
annum upon the revenue of the Crown, for the maintenance of the Queen;
agreed to and H. C. acquainted. 22 Car. I. VIII. 280a. Letter of thanks
from the Queen read. Journal of the House of Lords.


_The Manuscripts of the Marquess Townshend_

1628, Oct. 22. Gray’s Inn. N. Bacon to his uncle Sir Nathaniel Bacon. For
Bohemia the newes is verrie uncertaine as allsoe for Hungaria.

The King of Bohemia is comme back againe to the Hage, being resolved to
forgoe not a title that he hath allreadie gotten. V. 11, p. 22, app. 4.


_The Manuscripts of His Grace the Duke of Beaufort, K. G._

Various notes, chiefly out of Sir S. D’Ewes collections: ... story that
the crown of Bohemia was offered in Queen Elizabeth’s time to Humphrey
Tindal, dean and afterwards bishop of Ely, of whom the writer remarks
that, though he bore the arms of Bohemia, “how Bohemian blood came into
his veins I know not.” In the margin is a pedigree, in the handwriting
of Peter Le Neve, showing the connextion of the Tindal family, by their
descent from Will Tindal, of Felbrigge who married Ala, the daughter of
Sir Simon Felbrigge, K. G. and Margaret, daughter of the nephew of the
then King of Bohemia, who had come into England with her cousin Anne, the
wife of Richard II. V. 12, p. 156, app. 9.


_The Manuscripts of Robert Harley, Earl of Oxford_

A Declaration of the Commons House of Parleamente made the 4th daye of
June 1621. (to assist the King of Bohemia) fo. 33. & another of the same,
fo. 34. V. 1, p. 5.

Original Letter of Rycharde Marlande, to the Lord Cobham Deputie of
Calais, Dat. from Frankefort 13 daye of Aprill, advertising him that
Seignor Peter Captain of the Albeneses, offereth to leave the Contede
Buars, and to save his Majestie with 200 Man well horsed and armed. That
the Emperor is departed from Nurenburg where he determined to raise an
Army for reinstating his Brother in the Throne of Bohemia, from whence he
was driven by his own Subjects; and against the Duke of Saxony & Landgrave
of Hessen, who are assisted by the French King. V. 1, p. 121.

The Entry of the King & Queen of Bohemia into the City of Prague & their
coronation there. A. D. 1562. V. 1, p. 171.

The Consaile, touching the method to be taken in mentioning certain
matters to the Emperor; and requiring ... to keep a watchful eie upon the
Romans & Maximilian the King of Bohemia. V. 1, p. 335.

A shorte Note of the Charge committed to John Sheres, sent of late to the
King of Romans. To shew the Kings will continue the ancient amity with the
House of Austria, & particularly to the King of the Romans & Maximilian
King of Bohemia. V. 1, p. 335.

Notes of the time when K. Charles I. & his Sister the Queen of Bohemia
were born. V. 2, p. 17.

A lamentable Petition exhibited in the Names of the afflicted Christians
in the East-parts (viz. of Bohemia, Hungarie, Polonia, & Helvetia) to the
Christian Kingdomes in the West. V. 2, p. 132.

A Note of all such Moneys as have bin payd unto me Sir Edward Barrett Kt.
for the Affairs of the King of Bohemia. A. D. 1620. V. 2, p. 135.

Original Letter of Mons. de Plessen, to Achatius Bourgrave de Dona
Ambassador of the King of Bohemia at the Court of England, in French.
Heidelberg. 19 Jan., 1620. V. 2, p. 142.

Mandate of the Emperor Rudulph. II. against the English Merchant
Adventurers. Dat. at his Castle of Prag. 5 Aug. anno Imp. 22. Translated
out of Highe-Dutche, into Englishe by W. Smythe. V. 2, p. 237.

Brief of Pope Martine V. to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury; against John
Huss & Hierome of Prague; after their martyrdome: translated into English.
V. 3, p. 16.

The D. of Buckingham’s Letter to General Cecyll, about assisting the King
of Bohemia, dated Whitehall 4th May, 1625. V. 3, p. 48.

News of the Wars in Bohemia. V. 3, p. 78.

The Historie of Bohemia, the first parte describing the Countrye,
Scituation, Climate, Commodities, the Name and Nature of the People and
Compediovsly continving the Historie from the beginning of the Nation
to their first Christian Prince about the yeare of Christ 990. In ten
Chapters, with an Appendix containing a Proclamation of the Estates
of Bohemia, whereby the whole order of the Jesuites is proscribed and
banished out of that Kingdome, as publick disturbers of the Peace, and
enemies of the State; with proviso yt they shall never be admitted again.
Whereunto is added a breefe Narration, how the Jesuites are or have beene
by solemne Decree banished out of everye Kingdome and Province in Europe,
very few excepted, and where they be they are held in great jealousie and
suspition to be publick perturbers of the Peace, and dangerous Enemies of
the State. V. 3, p. 111.


_The Manuscripts of William More Molyneux, Esq._, of Loseley Park, Co.
Surrey

1619, Aug. 16. A Proposition made by the Estates of Bohemia in thire
assembly at Prague vpon the election of a Kinge, the 16th of August 1619,
being the birth-day of ye Prince Elector Palatine. Rep. 7, part 1, p. 673.


_The Manuscripts of Trinity College, Dublin_

The King of Bohemia, anciently in right of that Kingdome, Butler to the
Roman Empire, as the heyre male of this family (House of Ormonde?) is by
hereditary right Butler of Ireland. Rep. 8, part 1, p. 588.


_The Manuscripts of the Earl of Ashburnham_

Passages and occurrences relating to the Crown of Bohemia and the
Palatinate. A folio of 80 pages, in writing of the reign of James I. Rep.
8, part 3, p. 14.


_The Manuscripts of the Right Honourable the Earl De La Warr_ (_Baron
Buckhurst_) at Knole Park, Co. Kent.

1621, Nov. 2. Abstracts of such moneys as have been issued for the
affaires of the Palatinate, as well to the Ambassadors as otherwise, out
of the Receipts of His Majesty’s Exchequer. Viscount Doncaster, Ambassador
to Bohemia, etc. £28,745. Rep. 4, part 1, p. 281.

1626, June 16. Stepney. Sir Ralph Hopton to the Earl of Middlesex. The ill
success at home frustrates our successes abroad; for the Bohemian agent
showed him yesterday letters whereby he is confidently assured that the
Revolt in Upper Austria is much strengthened, so as they can march 70,000
men; they have defeated their Governor and do now beseige Lints. (2½ pp.)
Rep. 4, part 1, p. 290.


_The Manuscripts of the Corporation of Sandwich_

Letter from Edward, Lord Zouch, to the Mayor and Jurats, Commonalty and
inhabitants, of Sandwich, requiring a subscription for the King and Queen
of Bohemia; date 1620. Rep. 5, part 1, p. 570.


_The Manuscripts of the Corporation of Totnes_

A letter to the Mayor and burgesses of Totnes, dated the 9th of January,
1612, and signed “W. Exon” (William Cotton, Bishop of Exeter). It is the
desire of his Majesty and the Archbishop of Canterbury that collections
be made throughout the Kingdom for the Reformed Churches, and the College,
in the City of Prague, Bohemia. Rep. 3, p. 349.


_The Manuscripts in the Library of the University of Edinburgh_

Protest by the nobles of Bohemia and Moravia, addressed to the Council
of Constance, on 2nd of September, 1415, in reference to the burning of
John Huss and Jerome of Prague. The document is written on a sheet of
parchment, authenticated by 100 signatures and as many seals. It was
bequeathed to the University in 1657, by Dr. William Guild, sometime
principal of King’s College, Aberdeen, an office from which he was deposed
by five colonels of General Monk’s army in 1651, but it is uncertain how
it was acquired by Dr. Guild. Statement by John Stuart. Rep. 1, p. 121.


_The Manuscripts of the Right Honourable Lord Calthorpe_, Grosvenor
Square, London

A discourse concerning the Palsgrave’s accepting the crown of Bohemia.
Rep. 2, p. 43.


_The Manuscripts of the Most Honourable the Marquis of Westminster_, at
Eaton Hall, Co. Chester

A true description of the late deceased Prince of Bohemia, taken 1629 (11
pages), by an attendant. Rep. 3, p. 215.


_The Manuscripts of the Most Hon. Marquis of Salisbury_, at Hatfield House

1554, Apr. 27. Letter from Queen of Bohemia to the Queen, Rep. 4, p. 204.

1554, Apr. 27. Letter from King of Bohemia to the Queen, Rep. 4, p. 204.

Manufacture of saltpetre by Lazarus Erkerne, chief master of the Emperor’s
mines in Bohemia.

The Arms of the King of Bohemia, viz. a red lion (?) with 2 tails in a red
field. Rep. 3, p. 188.

States of Bohemia to the Elector of Saxony. Rep. 3, p. 214.

1619, Sept. 7. Bohemian States to Queen of Bohemia. Rep. 3, p. 179.

1620, May 31. Baron Dona (Bohem. Amb.) to Salisbury. Rep. 3, p. 179.


_The Manuscripts of the Earl of Ancaster_, preserved at Grimsthorpe

NEWSLETTERS

1620, Oct. 21. The Hague. The new King of Hungary was in the field with
70,000 men. He had sent 20,000 men into Stiria (where they sacked and
burned divers places and ordered the States to join the Confederation),
and another 20,000 into Bohemia and Moravia. He himself was going with
30,000 into Austria, having left strong garrisons in Hungary. V.-, p. 395.

On the 28th ult. the King (Frederick) left Prague accompanied by the
Bohemian nobles, with two companies of guards and a thousand Silesian
horse, to go with the new King of Hungary into Moravia. The army of the
Emperor had again entered Bohemia, and beseiged Wittinga, but the Bohemian
army, having heard of Bucquoy’s designs from the prisoners, followed them
and forced them to retire. P. 395.

1620, Nov. 4. The Hague. From Prague, news comes that the soldiers of
Bavaria have surprised Brachaditz, killing 1120 persons, including women
and little children, and sacking the town, in addition to what Bucquoy had
killed at Pisseck and Budian. V.-, p. 396.


_The Manuscripts of his Grace the Duke of Portland, K. G._, preserved at
Welbeck Abbey

1648. John Sictor, a Bohemian exile, to the House of Commons. Petition,
stating that it was nearly two years since he had presented to them 250
copies of Chronometrae (a specimen of which is probably among Lord Braye’s
papers) and other poems on the events of the Civil War, and entreating
a grant to enable him to return to Prague, which had been--as was
reported--occupied by the Swedish army. In Latin, v. I, p. 507.

1704-08. Baron Postheld, of Ollersfeld, being a native Bohemian and
a Protestant, and as such unable to enjoy his estate there, fled to
Denmark and took shipping for England aboard the Sorlings (Captain Cony,
commander), with letters of recommendation from the Danish King to Prince
George. But the ship was taken by the French squadron under Monsieur St.
Paul. Afterwards he was sent to Holland with a French pass and the French
King’s allowance for a prisoner (which was six livres only), whence he
came to England and delivered his letter to Prince George, who relieved
his necessities and recommended him to the King of Prussia, where, meeting
with the like ill fate, he returned to England, in hopes to be employed
in the forces ordered on the descent, but they being gone he prays to be
employed in some of the regiments which are designed to follow the said
descent. V. 8, p. 364.

(Perhaps by “the descent” is meant the despatch of troops with and
following Lord Galway, in the summer of 1704.)


_The Manuscripts of the Duke of Hamilton_

1630, Novemb. David Ramsay in Hague to Marquis of Hamilton. I am in a
very good houp boeth from the King of Boheme and the esteatis to procur
sum assistance for the advancement of your lordships affairs. ... My
greatest deficulties with the King of Boheme and the esteatis is that they
cannot believe that the King of Ingland intendis aneything realie for the
advancement of your busines, the wich your lordship must remowe boeth by
his letteris and your awine. V. 11, p. 70, app. 6.

[Illustration: The Bohemian Voice

Forerunner of English language publications for the Bohemians]

  [Transcriber’s Note: Transcription of this illustration appears after
  Index.]

The Marquis of Hamilton to King Charles the First. I woold say sumnhatt of
the King of Boyem boot I knoe nott whatt more then thatt he lives heir as
ane priuatt wolantir. He is contented with this way of lyf bot I knoe not
another thatt is much in loufe with itt or ambitious long to karie thatt
name. For my oune part I feir my accommodatioun will be so euill during
the tyme thatt I ame of thatt number as I shall be constraned to remain
in sume toune till I be meaid happi by your Majesties commands, the treu
performens of uhich shall euer be the chiffer kair of him who is borene
and obliged in the heayest degrie to dey your Majesties most humbill
thankfull obediantt saruant and loyall subieck, Auxburg, May, 1632. V. 11,
p. 81, app. 6.

Letters from various officers who served with Thirty Years’ War. Banier is
preparing to go into Bohemia, and an endeavour will be made to carry the
war into the Emperors possessions. The death of Wallenstein is reported,
but the writer is not yet assured of it.... V. 11, p. 84, app. 6.

To the Marquis of Hamilton from “Robert Weir” (perhaps of the family of
Stonebyres) giving an account of the movements of the army in Silesia.

To Aus(cha) fra thence to Littmirittz (Litoměřice) quhair Don Baltassar
was lying with 8000 horses and fut; bot as son as thai saw that was war
fully resolved not to sport with them thai past the watter (Elbe) and
burnt the bridg not being abone 20 killed to thaim so we played on thaim
with canon bot thai marched Prag, quhair the next morning we marched
for Rautnitz bot thai deffended the pass that we passed 2 myll higher
to Melnick quhair we gott 3 prams and so passed our infantrie and small
pices in a littill Iland quhair we could waid to the vther mainland and so
passed.

Four regements of horss wes past, and than past our muskettiers which
waidit, not being above the belt and then past our collers and the rest
of our horss and lay wil the Duc of Saxon cam with his army which he past
lykwayis in twa dayis and marched for Prag quhair the nixt morning about
8 of the clok we aryved at Marie de la Victorie quhair the enemi had som
groves of horss standing bot thai stayed not long but were beattin in
to a schance and trenchis that thai had maid on the end of the whyt berg
amongst the wynzeards nixt to the town wher we marched hard to them, quher
we sustained som loss with their canon both amongst our horss and fut.
Ther wes once a resollutionn takin to storme thair trenchis bot it semes
the Duc of Saxxon wes not willing for it wald have trubilled vs; thai were
to the number of 15000 men as thai report, Collredo and Don Baltasser. We
continewed 3 dayis wher ther wes grit hunger, for ther wes nether bred nor
forrage, nether is 4 myll fra Prag, for the diversiown that wes in winter
hes spoylled all about Prag, that for falt of victuall we war forcit to
draw back to Melneck quhair the Duc of Saxxon past the watter and we
marched down the watter to Littmirritz and intrenched our self against
Littmirritz and maid som 8 redouts quhair we could draw our battell up
behind them, quhair we haue lyne this fyne weikes. Signed “Robert Weir”
Littmirritz 28 August 1634.

Another letter, also from Litoměřice from “David Drummond,” probably Sir
David Drummond narrates in a more summary manner the events referred to in
the previous letter. V. 11, p. 90, app. 6.


_The Manuscripts of the Marqess of Ormonde_, preserved at Kilkenny Castle

A Brief Account of the Conspiracy to place the Duke of York on the Throne.
The general design of these confederates is to reform, that is in their
sense, to reduce by the sword all other ways being found ineffectual all
people of his Majestys dominions to the Romish religion and obedience,
without giving any tolerance at all, as they (Jesuits) have practiced in
Bohemia and other hereditary countries of the Emperor with desired success
to their enrichment. The collection contains a valuable portrait of the
Queen of Bohemia. V. 4, p. 182.


_The Manuscripts of the Earl of Denbigh_, preserved at Newnham Paddox,
Lutterworth

1636, May 19. Hague. Sir William Boswell to Lord Fielding. An Ambassador
from the King of Poland (who was two years since in England or Scotland
with his Majesty Zavaisky) came lately hither and had audience of the
Queen of Bohemia. His business is about the Princesse her daughter, which
is to be treated as occasion shall require in England. V.-, p. 28, part 5.

1636, Dec. 2. Ratisbon. John Taylor to Lord Fielding. Bohemia and Silesia
fear that Wrangle, a brave commander of the Swedes, will fall into their
countries, he having already defeated some Saxon regiments, which he
pursued into Silesia. V.-, p. 42, part 5.


_The Franciscan Manuscripts at the Convent_, Merchants Quay, Dublin

1642, May 17. Brussels. Hugh Bourke (Commissary of the Irish Friars Minors
in Germany and Belgium) to Luke Wadding, Guardian of St. Isidores, Rome. I
am Killing myself with travel and travail, and yet cannot accomplish any
good result for lack of means; wherefore I am minded to leave all and
withdraw to Bohemia for I can do no more.... V.-, p. 140.


_The Manuscripts of the Duke of Buccleuch and Queensberry, K. G, K. F._,
preserved at Montague House, Whitehall.

1610, Feb. 26. Dusseldorp. Jo. Dickenson to Winwood. Touching affairs and
disputes in Germany, Bohemia and the Netherlands. V. 1, p. 98.

1611, March 20. Dusseldorp. Same to same. Affairs in Bohemia, Alsace, the
Palatinate, Juliers, Germany, Brussels, etc. V. 1, p. 98.

1613, Dec. 29. Mons. J. Luntius to Winwood. Affairs of Germany, the Turks,
Transylvania, Hungary, Bohemia. V. 1, p. 148.

1614, Mar. 29. Mons. Dathenes to Winwood. Refers to the affairs of France,
Spain, Transylvania, the Bohemians, Austrians, Hungarians, Germany and the
Swiss Cantons. V. 1, p. 157.

1617, Apr. 10. Cologne. Mons. Bilderbeck to Winwood. Affairs of Italy,
France, Germany, Bohemia, Hungary, Poland, Spain. V. 1, p. 195.

1620, Dec. 13. Spittle. Sir Charles Montagu to Sir Edward Montagu. To
begin with the worst first, there is news come now of more certain truth
than heretofore from Bohemya, which is that the King’s army hath had a
great overthrow, and Prage is lost, but the King and Queen are at a strong
place called Presslaw in Selecya, and the King of Hungary and he have met
and they both intend to raise a far greater force to set on them suddenly;
God give them better success. V. 1, p. 255.


_The Manuscripts of the Earl of Mar and Kellie_, preserved at Alloa House,
N. B.

1621, Feb. 18th. London. The Archbishop of St. Andrews to John, Lord
Erskine: In Bohemia they ar making to the feildis. Count Mansfeild layis
in Bohem with ane army of ten thowsand. The King is yit in Silesia with
another. It wold appear that His Majesty expectis good and honest dealing
at the Spanishe hand, quharin I bessech God he be not deceavit. V.-, p. 94.

1626, Mar. Intelligence from Germany. The Bohemians have got a great
defait. Count of Manflet, thair generall, being courting his mistres
in Pragg, and his armie upon the fieldis with his Serjant-Major, Count
Bucquoy set upon them on a sudden, Kild 300 men and defait the rest. V.-,
p. 149.


_The Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Esq._, preserved at Dropmore

1788, Aug. 4. The Marquis of Buckingham to W. W. Grenville, in London. I
have seen a great deal of a very intelligent Irish Bohemian Count Taafe,
who is come to collect part of Butler’s property at Ballyragett, to which
he is heir, and his language is that of the most sovereign contempt for
the Imperial Joseph and his army.... His accounts of the disaffection of
Hungary and Bohemia are very interesting.... V. 1, p. 349.


_The Manuscripts of Lord Montagu of Beaulieu_

1620, Sept. A Letter worthy the overlooking from a gentleman in Vienna
attending on Sir Henry Wotton, Lord Ambassador to the Emperor and sent to
his brother-in-law in London. Newsletter from Vienna:

“Now to return to the King of Bohemia. He hath likewise several armies in
the field, several friends ans several generals. The first is the Prince
of Anhalte, the second the Earl of Mansfield, the third the Earl of Tourne
(Thurn); who have under them fifty thousand men in several quarters,
whereby they have so well demanded themselves, and wherewith so well
withstood their enemies, that the Emperor hath no cause to boast of his
summers work, for his forces hitherto have done nothing but received loss,
and it is very likely that if the Transilvanian Prince do join once with
the King of Bohemia, they will surely put the Emperor to a sore plunge,
for story doth not acquaint us with such a formidable division again, and
I believe it is a secret locked up in the treasury of heaven to know or
discover what will be the issue of these terros and threatenings of all
sides.” V.-, pp. 97-104.


_The Manuscripts of the Earl Cowper_, preserved at Melbourne Hall,
Derbyshire

1624, Oct. 1. John Coke to the Lord Brooke. Out of Germany a bruit
flieth which I hope is not true that Tilly hath either taken or besieged
Basle and that the Emperor hasteneth the Diet for a ratification of the
Electorate and a final exclusion of the person of the King of Bohemia. V.
12, p. 172.

1633, May 16. Copy of accounts passed by Sir J. Coke, of Sir Robert
Anstruther, Ambassador Extraordinary in Germany, etc. Allowance for blacks
for him and his family to condole the deaths of the Kings of Sweden and
Bohemia. £200. V. 12, p. 9, app. 2.

1641, July 12. London. Ed. Sidenham to Sir John Coke. From Bohemia they
write the 22nd of June 1641 that the 19th there was a battle fought
betwixt the Swedes and the Imperialists, wherein the Imperialists lost
four or five thousand and the Swedes 500 men. This was fought at Walstadt
in Bohemia. V. 12, p. 287, app. 3.


_The Manuscripts of George Wingfield Digby, Esq._, of Sherborne Castle,
Co. Dorset

1611, July 10. Bruxcelles. W. Trumbull to Sir Digbye. The Emperor and
his brother Mathias are now in treaty for a reconciliation; but what
appearance is there of an agreement, when ye younger will have all, and
leave the other nothing. Eight arbitrators are chosen to accomodate their
quarrells whereof De Balthazar de Cunega, is ye Firste on ye Emperour’s
parte, although in ye deposing of him from ye crowne of Bohemia, hee did
wholly runne course with K. Mathias. V. 10, p. 523, app. 1.

1611, Aug. 10. Venice. Sir Dudley Carleton to Sir J. Digbye. The new King
of Bohemia hathe lately written his letters to this State and changed his
language from Latin (wherein he was ever wont to write) into Highe-Duche.
V. 10, p. 527.

Feb. 8. Venice. Sir D. Carleton to Sir J. Digbye. This State apprehending
ye King of Hungarie as a Knowen ill-willer of theirs, runne on in
projecting his certaine election, and, ut est timor ingeniousus interpres,
thei frome out of general prognostiques a conclusion unto themselves wh
thei most feare. His being allready possessed of Hungarie & Bohemia, thei
doubte will drawe on by a necessary consequence the thirde Crowne.... V.
10, p. 561.

1617, July 29. Sir Ralph Winwood, Secretary of State, to the Earl of
Buckingham.... I have thought yt necessary to acquaynt your Lordship with
an advertissment I lately receaved ... from hys Agent Mr. Cottington, at
Madrid that ... of a propownded marriage between the sonne of Ferdinando
of Gratz lately elected Kyng of Bohemia and the Infanta Donna Maria
daughter of the King of Spayne. V. 10, p. 102.

1617, Aug. 15. The same to the same. May yt please your Lordship. The
resident of Venice lately hath been with me advertising that from that Duc
he had charge to declare to Hys Majesty thease three poynts.

That the treaty between the new Kyng of Bohemia and that Commonwealthe was
resumed and upon the poynt to be concluded, etc. V. 10, p. 103.


_The Manuscripts of the Earl of Westmorland_, at Apethorpe,
Northamptonshire

1619, Sept. 24. Heidelberg. The Elector Palatine to Sir E. Herbert.
Bohemia has become the scene of the most bloody and horrible tragedies
that have ever been heard of among Christians. The Roman Catholic Princes
and Electors have collected a great number of soldiers. Foreigners, mostly
in the pay of Spain, have been allowed to pass through the Empire into
Bohemia contrary to Imperial Constitutions. The Princes and States united
with me have armed in self-defence, considering the trouble that might
arise after the disbandement of the troops in Bohemia.... You will have
heard that the States of Bohemia have unanimously elected me, although I
had not in any way inspired to that crown. V. 10, p. 381.

1619, Dec. 24. The Hague. Viscount Doncaster to Sir E. Herbert ...
Ferdinand would give me no answer because the Spanish Ambassador, Count
d’Ogniate, was not there.... Finding no disposition to peace in either
part, I pretended the necessity of making a journey to the Spa for my
health. Here I received the news that the Prince Palatine was chosen King
of Bohemia. I was afterwards told to return to Frankfort to congratulate
the Emperor on his election, and to protest that our King had neither hand
nor Knowledge of this action of the Bohemians.... V.-, p.

1621, Oct. 6. Copy of a letter written by a dutiful servant “Nobody” sent
from Bruxelles to his worthy master “Nemo.” On Bohemian affairs, & Lord
Digby’s embassy to the Emperor. V. 10, p. 20, app. 4.

The Lord Digbie’s propositions to his Cesarean Matie, for the restoration
of the Count Palatine & on Bohemian affairs. V. 10, p. 22, app. 4.

1621, Nov. 12. The King’s letter to the Emperour as to the Count Palatine
& on Bohemia affairs. V. 10, p. 22, app. 4.

1622, June 2. A copy of a letter sent from Mannheim on Bohemian affairs.
V. 10, p. 23.


_The Manuscripts of the Family of Gawdy_, formerly of Norfolk

1631, Nov. 8. Sir Edmond Moundeford to Framlingham Gawdy. The King of
Sweden is stept to the side of the Upper Palatinate; the King of Bohemia
is going to him. 24,000 men by our King and the States are parlied of for
him. V. 10, p. 136, app. 2.

1661-2, Feb. 13. T(homas) L(any) to Anne de Grey. The Queen of Bohemia
died last night. V. 10, p. 195.


_The Manuscripts of Hon. Frederick Lindley Wood_

1639, Aug. 27. London. Philip Burlamachi to Sir Arthur Ingram. The Swedes
armees are in Bohemia keeping the Imperialist within Prague perplexed with
plague and famine; there may everi day some notable incontre follow; a
niew suply is come to the Swedes from Sweden and Liffland which gives them
courage to march towards Slesia. V. 8, p. 52.


_The Lansdowne Manuscripts_ in the British Museum.

Trickings of the arms of the Emperors, Kings and nobility of Germany,
Hungary, Bohemia, etc. fo. 34.

A relation of the defeat of the King of Bohemia’s army and of the
subsequent misfortunes of himself and his Queen. fo. 80.

[Illustration: The Bohemian Review]

  [Transcriber’s Note: Transcription of this illustration appears after
  Index.]

Ad Serenissimam Regiam Majestatem Magnæ Britanniæ Joh. Amos Comenius.
Supplex vox Afflictorum pro Christo ex Bohemia, Moravia, Polonia, et
Hungaria. fo. 190b.

A proposition made by the Estates of Bohemia, in theire Assembly at
Prague, upon the election of a Kinge, the 16th of August 1619, being the
birthday of the Prince Elector Pallatine. fo. 198.

Chronograms respecting the King of Bohemia, fo. 202.

Copy of the King of Bohemia’s answer to a letter of King James I.,
thanking him for the education of his eldest son at his Court, etc. Hague,
20-30 Decem. 1623. fo. 335.


_The Manuscripts of Sir Hervey Juckes Lloyd Bruce_, preserved at Clifton
Hall, Nottingham

1619. A Proposition made by the States of Bohemia in theyr Assembly at
Prague uppon the Election of a Kinge the 16th of August, beinge the
birthday of the Prince Elector Palatine. Albeit the nomination of a Kinge
of Bohemia requires a mature councell and deliberacion, which ought to
precede the nomination, it is an affayre notwithstandinge of the lesse
difficultye then the iejectinge (sic) of a king which gave a beginninge
to this and stands in neede both of a good justification and of a great
power, where (as) the nomination hath of those aydes but follows of
itselfe after the rejection.

Now therefore, since the iejection (sic) as the things importinge us is
already done, the nomination wilbe much the more easily provided that in
the choyse we stand not presisely upon such a perfection as the world
cannot yeild us. It behoves us also to set apart all perticuler passions
and to have regard only to those reasons that are fundamentall, for
there are requisite points so necessary to be considered in the election
of a Kinge that (it) is not for a good patriot to give his councell for
receivinge of one in whome those points required is not found, but one may
with very good assurance conclude for him in whome they doe dayly more
meete than in any other man.

As in the first place in such a subject it is necessary that there be none
of those thinges to be feard; for if Kinge Ferdinand was rejected, that
is to say, he ought not eyther to prosecute or advance in the respect
of religion nor exceede in the dependance of his owne counsaylors or
of strangers, but to joine himselfe with the States he ought not to be
opiniative nor given to doe thinges of his owne head, but to accomadate
the customes of his house and his to the ordinances and liberties of thys
crowne.

In the second place it is required that he affect the States’ reputation.

Thirdly, that in time both of peace and warr he governe his Kingdome by
his owne presence worthyly and profitably.

Fourthly, that confederates receive no cause of feare from eyther of
danger or damage. Since then there are few that are inferred into the
treaty of eleccion, that is to say, the Kinge of Denmarke, the Elector
Palatine, the Elector of Saxoni, the Duke of Savoy, and the Prince of
Transilvania, yt will therefore be to purpose to consider that, although
every one of these princes in his owne perticuler deserveth prayse and
commendation, neverthelesse there is amongst them a certaine diversity
which everyone by himselfe may prudently waigh. And forasmuch as it is
not permitted us to judge liberally of great princes in this place, it
shall suffice without offence of any breifely to deduce the reasons for
which the Elector Palatine ought to be esteemed very capable of the crowne
of Bohemia, and fitt to mainteyne the present estate of the kingdome,
for although his highnesse be not above 23 yeeres of age, he is a prince
of great judgement bred up from his cradle in goodnesse and vertue, one
that hath persons of quality about him as well of the feild as for the
state who are used to curteisy, and himselfe of very plentifull hopes, and
besides at this age he will better accomodate himselfe to the customes of
the kingdome then if he were more increased in yeares; and God bestows not
wisdome alwayes according to the age of a man, but to him that calls to
God for it in His feare.

He is a prince moderate, virtuos and resolute in his actions, quick and
sharpe in his discourse, true, courteous towards all men, very well
languaged, holds a very fayre court of earls, barrons and gentlemen,
loves and cherishes the nobility, imployes in his service even men of
meane condition when he finds meritt in them for it. He letts no worthy
service passe him without his acknowledgement, he governs his subjects
and country (in part the frontives of this kingdome) with prudence, gives
estimation to men of honor, holds a well ordered councell, frequents the
councell table in his owne person, takes an exact heed of the opinions
and propositions of his councellors, gives good cause of havinge his
judgement approv’d and commended of thinges of importance, inclines his
understandinge willingely to other mens information, loves the common good
and therein takes paines with zeale and without feare, beares compassion
to the afflicted, shewes himselfe laborious and resolved, is beloved
of his subjects, beares himselfe peaceably with his neighbors of what
religion soever they be, and winnes respect of those different beliefs for
his owne religion. He is well affected, yet those who are of another fayth
in his countries doe not find themselves disquieted in their consciences
nor in their exercise of their religion, so as every man may live freely
under him, videlicet, his conversation be honest and vertous. There is
none can abuse or accuse him of precipitation or opinatives (sic), a thing
worthy remarkeable (sic).

He is in correspondence with those of the house of Palatine and Bavoirs
and, notwithstandinge so, that cause forsakes nothinge of those rightes
nor of the duties belonginge to the generall estate of the country, and
howsoever that this prince be but younge and shewes himselfe courteous
and sweet towards his people, for all that there is no lightnesse,
dissollutions (sic) nor voluptuousnesse seene in him nor any disorder
nor excesse in his diett nor any avarice and digality (sic) or any other
thinge whatsoever unbecominge or contrary to the reputation of a prince.
For the assistance the crowne of Bohemia may expect from him, it may be
understoode of any man that not only he is not in debt, and that of his
revenue he can lay some things upp, but that also the Kinge of Great
Brittaine is his father-in-law, the Kinge of Denmark is his neere kinsman,
and likewise the Elector of Brandenbourh, the Prince of Orenge his uncle,
the Duke of Bullion his ally, the States of the United Provinces his
confederates, and ancient alliances with France, the Kinge of Sweden and
the Hanse Townes his friends, and for his correspondents the Duke of
Savoi, Venice and Switzerland. He is a good credit with all the Princes
Electors and other princes and Estates of the Empire, more perticulerly
with those of the Union he hath confederacies, the Prince of Transsilvania
and High Hungary doe beare affection to him, Saxonie and Bavoir are in
good termes with him, Mentz and the neighbouring countries looke uppon him
with honor and respect, insomuch as the crowne of Bohemia by this only
meanes may procure the amity of all those which we doe now labour for
with so much paine and travell, and by the same meanes may be conserved
and fortified against our enimies, which cannot of any other nominated in
the election be eyther expected or hoped for. And since it is a certainty
that this prince would not accept of the election for Ambition sake, but
only for the common good, we may therefore promise ourselves that he will
alwayes continue in the good affection he hath already shewed to this
crowne by the profitable counsell and assistances which as well as his
owne person as other wayes according to the occasions he hath made to
appeare, where (as) there are some others that for for theyr perticuler
conservations have greatly prejudiced not only the estates of the kingdome
of Bohemia but the countries also and provinces confederats.

Thirdly, the sayd confederated provinces are to consider whoe are already
in good understandinge with this prince, that they cannot have the like
confidence in others who are to much tyed in the respect of the house of
Austria to succour the sayd provinces in theyr neede, and in such a case
the confederations would bring them prejudice rather than benefitt, a
point of great waight touchinge this crowne as may be seene by experience.

Since then that all these qualities required doe meete in the person
of the Prince Elector, and that in those of the others treated in the
election (the Prince of Transilvania excepted, who hath his eye upon
another marke) there are many imperfections to be found, as may easily
be shewed, it is therefore a matter to no purpose longer to defer the
election, and so much the rather because the crowne of Bohemia with the
countries confederate will now after the rejection be more disquieted
than ever; and remayning without a head we shall find none whoe will duly
undertake our protection or defence. V. 7, p. 269.

1619. The joyfull receivinge, triumphant entronce and stately formall
coronation of Fredericke, the Prince Elector Palatine, and the Lady
Elizabeth, Princesse Electoresse, King and Queen of Bohemia, on Munday and
Thursday the 25th and 28th day of October ould stile, 1619.

It is knowne unto all men for what weightie reasons the States of the
kingdome of Bohemia and of the incorporated countries have with one joynte
consent excluded Kinge Ferdinand from the kingedome, and have in his
place, with an especially mutuall agreement, chosen and named for theire
kinge the right highe and mightie Prince Fredricke by the grace of God
Erle Palatine of the Rhyne, Duke of both the Bavaries, Prince Elector
and Vicar of the Romane Empire, whome after a lawfull callinge they have
crowned on the 4th and 7th dayes of November, newe stile, that is, the
25th and 28th of October, ould stile, 1619.

Uppon the 21-31 of October, 1619, afternoone, came his Majestie with
the Queene his wife, the younger prince theire eldest sonne, his Lord
brother Duke Lodowicke, the Duke of Wertemberge, the 2 Princes of Anhalt,
together with his whole retinue, consistinge of five companies of curast
horsemen, 500 harquebus horsemen, and 3 auncients of footemen of 300 a
peece, with many coatches and a very greate number of wagons laden with
the carriages towards Prague, and beinge come within 2 or 3 Englishe miles
there of into a faire pleasant place be a parke called the Starre, where
the Lords, the States of the kingdome of Bohemia and of the incorporated
countryes of Moravia, Silesia and both of Lusatiæs, with the magistrates
and chiefe men of the 3 citties of Prague, attended his Majesties cominge,
accompanied with about a 1000 horse, very statelie and well appointed;
there the(y) alighted and received him out of his coatche with greate
state, honor and reverence, unto whome the Baron of Tallenberge, Lord
Greate Chamberlaine, made a speech in the Bohemian tongue, which the
Barron of Ruppa interpreted in Dutche; his Majestie gave thereunto so good
an answere as that the States much rejoyced thereat, which done, they came
one after another, kneeled downe and kissed his Majesties hand. In like
respect every way was the Queene received, save that they kneeled not unto
her.

Then his Majestie mounted on horsebacke, but yett stayed a whyle, till the
lords and gentry were also mounted and that theire Coronell Kinski had
orderly marshall’d them, whose discipline his Majestie well liked. Then
the(y) marched on conductinge his Majestie towerds Prague; when he came
into the cittie, the citizens of the 3 citties of Prague stoode in armes,
very bravely appointed, as well on horsebacke as on foote on both sides of
the street and open places, makeinge a lane or courte or guarde frome the
entringe in of the cittie unto the castle; theire Majesties rid alonge,
and that in this manner.

They of the little cittie were one cornett of horse with 6 trumpetts
and one kettledrumme, they of the newe cittie one cornett of horse with
6 trumpetts and one kettledrumme, they of the ould cittie one cornett of
horse with 6 trumpetts and one kettledrumme, as also another companie of
200 horse voluntary well-willers, and 7 companies of foote, all citizens,
exceedingly well mounted and furnished.

And when his Majestie came nere unto the newe forte and bullwarke before
the castle, whereon stood a companie on foote with a displayed ancient,
there were standinge 400 boures or husband and laboringe countrymen
representinge the communalty and 4th state or parte of the land, all
armed accordinge to the ould and auncient custome and manner of their
country, videlicet, they had an ould weatherbeaten ancient wherein was
painted the name Ziseha (sic),[19] theire auncient captaine or generall
and deliverer, with a challice, and the hoste or signe of a wafer, eache
theire armes of the ould fashion, a hevy brestplate, a massie headepeece
to assault and scale with all, wooden clubes set with iron spikes, iron
flayles of threshalle, crosbowes, great iron sheildes, with 2-handed
swords, and stood in battaile array as Lizeha (sic) had in his time
appointed them. When his Majestie came unto them he stayed a while and was
by theire captaine entertained and welcommed with a Lattine ovation, who
did greatlie congratulate his Majesties comeinge, and havinge concluded,
the multitude began to cry out, Vivat, vivat Rex Fredericus! and so ran
together to route on a heape one amongst another, makinge such a greate
noyse with theire armes as that his Majestie tooke greate pleasure thereat
and could not forbeare laughter. Before his Majestie there marched 400
horsemen under theire Coronell Kinsby (sic), representinge the knightehood
and gentry of the land, who had 8 silver trumpetts and 4 other trumpetts
with 8 cettledrummes; theire cornett was of blew damaske whereon were the
Prince Elector Palatine’s armes richly imbrodered; the Lords Derectors
and States of the land followed after bravelie mounted; after them rid
the Duke of Mansterberge (sic) of Silesia, haveinge on his right hand the
Duke of Wertemberge and on the left hand the younge Prince of Anhalt.
Then rid his Majestie’s Lord brother Lodowicke with ould Prince Dhinstion
(Christian) of Anhalt, after whome imediatelie followed his kinglie
Majestie on a blacke greate horse covered with a blacke footeclothe
all over imbrodered with silver. Then followed the Queene ridinge in a
exceeding rich coatch, like the whereof had never beene seene afore in
Prague, and by her sate the younge Prince her sonne; after her Majestie
came 2 other coatches wherein were the wives and daughters of divers
princes and earles, after which followed sundry other coatches with many
gentlewoemen, maides of honor and others, and after these came lastly the
Prince Electors owne coronell and harquebus horsemen and footemen in good
order, the horsemen well mounted, all statelie deckt with brave attire,
faire liveries and gallant scarfes of blewe, the King’s colours.

  [19] John Žižka, the Hussite.

This ridinge through the cittie lasted 3 houres longe, and was beheld of
many thousands of people to theire greate admiracion; his Majestie tooke
therein greate pleasure and did oftentimes put off his hatt, and with a
chearefull countenance bowe himselfe towerds the people, as did also the
Queene both chearefully and with greate majestie. When they were come
within the castle court there the(y) sawe a man sittinge above uppon the
churche with an auncient in his hand and waveing it over his heade, and
then another man sittinge uppon the rounde ball on the steeple toppe, who
played a longe time uppon a kettledrumme.

In the castle court theire Majesties alighted nere unto the longe hall
and went towerds the greene chamber, where there stoode a great number
of Bohemian laydes and gentlewoemen of good rancke richly attired, who
received her Majestie with greate reverence, and so attended on her into
her lodgings. All things were accomplished with such state, honor, and
good successe as the like was never yett done unto any Romane Emperor; all
which shall shortlie be cutt in brasse, and made publicke unto the viewe
of the worlde.

Here followeth the King’s coronacion.

All the highe officers of the kingdome as of nobilitie the Lord Chiefe
Burgrave Lord Bhonstowe, Barron of Bercha, the Lord Highe Steward of
the Lands, Lord Wilham Lobkowth or Belkowth Barron, Lord de (sic) High
Chamberlaine Lord John Barron of Tallonberge, the Lord Chiefe Justice
of the land, Lord Wentzeslawe, William Barron of Ruppa, the Lord Highe
Chancellour Lord Paul Barron of Ritschan, the Lord Chiefe Justice of the
Feodaries, Lord Peter Barron of Schambergke, the Lord Chiefe Burgrave of
Charlestone, Lord Joachim, Andrew Erle of Sclicke, Knights of the gentry,
the Chiefe Secretary of the land, Caspar Caepler, Undertreasurer Procopius
Dirarssetche, Underburgrave of Charlestone Bohnslaire of Micholowth, and
the Burgrave of the knightlie province, or tract of Grotzer, Henry Ottoe
of Losse and many others, beinge summoned and come the 22th of Octob. ould
stile, 2 (sic) Novemb. newe stile, to give their attendance, and doe
their service at the coronacion, the same was done on Munday the 4th of
Novemb. newe stile, that is the 25 of October. ould stile in the manner as
followeth.

First after the lords, the States, had attended his Majestie into the
castle churche and brought him into St. Wentzeslawes chappell, there they
putt uppon his Majestie the regall robe, which was a longe white sattine
or damaske gowne all over imbroidered with goulde; before went 40 preists,
singeinge men and querresters in white surplices, then behinde them 7
other more principall preists in blewishe or violett cloakes with rich
taffitie hatts of the same collor; after them followed the officers of the
kingedome carryinge the jewells and ensignes belongeing to the coronation,
as namely, the hereditary Archbutler of the kingedome of Bohemia with a
gilded silver tunne, the hereditarie Archcupberer with a silver potte,
and 2 others followinge them, bearinge 2 gilded bowles; the(n) followed
the Lord High Steward of the land with the scepter, the Lord Chiefe
Justice of the kingedome with the regall ball, the Archburkgrave with
the crowne, bearinge it in bothe his hands; after went the Heralde of
the kingedome Bohemia in his coate of armes with a white staffe in his
hand, then the hereditarie Lord High Marshall of the crowne of Bohemia
with the regall electorall sworde in a red velvett sheathe, after whome
immediatelie followed his Majestie bareheaded, havinge on the right hand
the Lord Administrator of the Bohemian Protestant Colledge and on his left
side another Bohemian preacher (who afterwards made the sermon), both
of them attyred in blacke velvett gownes. These 2 brought his Majestie
unto the alter, where they kneeled downe with him and prayed a while,
and then goeinge backe from the alter, they sett his Majestie in a faire
chaire of hayre-colored vellvett, who returneinge to the alter, the Lord
Administrator began to act and reade aloude certaine statutes of Lattine,
which done, the trumpetts sounded a greate noise; after was begun to be
sunge in Lattine Veni Sancte Spiritus, and thereuppon in the Bohemian
tongue God the Father dwell us by was also sunge, a collect reade, and the
preacher putt on his white surplice, went up into the pulpitt to preach
in the Bohemian speech. After he had propounded the matter he was to
treate of, and prayed, he stayed there till the people had sunge the 20th
Psalme also in the Bohemian language; then he went on with his sermon,
and yet in the meanewhile, betweene the partes thereof, were 3 severall
times Bohemian hymnes sunge; the sermon beinge ended the foresaid Lord
Administrator went againe to the alter and did there in Lattine singe the
Letany, which done, the trumpetts and musicke made a marveilous sweete
melodie, which done, a chapter out of the Apostle Paule to Timothy was
reade before the altar, and 2 Bohemian himnes sunge; this ended, the Lord
Administrator, with the preacher, the Lord Chief Burgrave, the Lord High
Steward and Lord Greate Chamberlaine of the land, attended his Majestie
to the alter, where they all kneeled downe and prayed againe. Then
they stoode up and, haveinge spoken unto his Majestie concerninge the
accustomed oathe he was to take, the Lord Chiefe Burgrave spake thrice
alone unto the people to this effect: “Seeing we are nowe aboute to
crowne his Majestie, it is thought meete againe to admonishe you joyntlie
to tell us freelie, whether it be your wills that we shall proceede on
forwards and crowne his Majestie?” Whereupon the people with a full and
jointe consent cryed out amaine and said everie time, “We will.” Then the
Lord Cheife Burgrave held a booke unto his Majestie, whereon his Majestie
haveing laide his 2 fingers, the Lord Cheife Burgrave reade the accustomed
oathe unto him in the Bohemian tongue, which his Majestie performed unto
the Lords the States repeatinge every word of it after the Lord Chief
Burgrave. Then his Majestie kneeled downe before the altar, where the
Lord Administrator stoode before him, holdinge on the booke a gilded box,
wherein was oyle, of which he tooke a little with one finger and anointed
therewith his Majestie’s foreheade, strekeinge it in forme of a crosse.
This beinge done, the Lord High Marshall delivered the sword into the
hands of the Lord Administrator, who took it and presentlie gave it to his
Majestie, sayinge these wordes: Per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum Amen.

After this he delivered unto him, first the scepter, then the regall ball,
put a red velvett cap upon his heade, and the lord Administrator takeinge
up the crowne in his hands, whereon the Lord Chiefe Burgrave, the Lord
Highe Steward of the land, the Lord Great Chamberlaine of the land, and
the other preist or minister tooke holde, and so joyntly sett the crowne
uppon his Majesties head in the name of the Holy and Blessed Indivisible
Trinitie, and then (he) was by them all lifted up, attended to his chaire
and sett therein with the crowne upon his heade and the ball and scepter
in his hands. Now when all this was done the Lord Cheife Burgrave said
unto the Lords the States: “My Lords, seeinge our gracious Kinge is
already crowned, so are we nowe accordinge unto our custome to sweare
allegeance unto him and to the crowne and acknowledge him for our gracious
Kinge and lord.” Hereupon the Lord Cheife Burgrave kissed the regall ball,
his Majestie’s right hand, touched the crowne with his 2 fingers, bowed
himself before his Majestie, and so went aside, giveinge way. About an
100 persons did all the like. After this did the Lord Administratour with
a loude voyce singe Te Deum laudamus. This followed the whole musicke,
cornetts, saggebutts, trumpetts, kettledrummes; the bells in all three
citties of Prague did ringe, 28 peeces of great ordinance made readie for
the purpose were discharged, and the citizens and souldiers of the cittie,
beinge 13 companies of foote and sundry cornetts of horse, discharged all
theire ouer (sic).

After that his Majestie had (sittinge in his coronation chaire) knighted
5 lords and 3 gentlemen, he rose and went thence attended with all the
lords others to the records of the land, where also accordinge to auncient
use and custome he sware to preserve and mainetaine them and subscribed
unto all he was to subscribe unto. Where as his Majestie went and returned
there were divers sorts of coynes of gould and silver throwne amongst
the people, one of which had on the one side this inscription, God and
theire (sic) cuntryes have given unto me this crowne, and on the other
side were five hands houldinge on a crowne, signifying the kingedome of
Bohemia and the 4 incorporated cuntries. All alonge the streetes, and
within the castle whereupon his Majestie rid and went to the records of
the land, there was broade clothe spreade on the ground, which at his
comeing backe was all given for larges and made prizd unto the people. At
his comeinge backe into the castle dinner was made ready, where was one
table of state prepared, whereat his Majestie sate in his regall robes
with the crowne on his heade, and the Queene with him. There were other
tables besides furnished as whereat sate the above said greate officers
and the rest of the Lords the States, and the(n) 14 other free tables
for strangers: within the castle court there were goodlie fountaines
made, which untill night ran plentifullie with wine red and white free
for all to take of that would. About the midst of dinner his Majestie,
the crowne to be taken off, stoode up and dranke into the health of all
the 3 states and Bohemia, and caused it to be drunke round aboute hall.
In the interim betweene his Majestie’s coronacion and the Queene’s, his
Majestie first confirmed all the officers and governours of the kingedome
in theire offices and governmentes, commanndinge justice and government
to goe on in the ordinarie due course as was meete and requisite. Then
next perceivinge that the stewes and brothelhouses were there still in
use and tollerated, and had theire house within the bulwarke round aboute
the cittie, and withall a world of poore and needy people as well of able
bodyes as aged, sicke and impotent, lyinge and standinge in the streets
to the great dishonor of God and of religion, his Majestie both put downe
the stewes presentlie and commannded an hospitall and house of correccion
to be forthwith builded; that so theis aged, sicke and impotent might be
sufficientlie relived and mainetained and the idle bodie to be put into
gives and forced to worke and labour for theire liveinge, that so both
the cittie and the state might be eased and clensed of all such, as is his
owne cuntry.

The Queene’s coronacion was on Thursday the 28th of October ould stile in
all respects like the Kinge’s saye that the sermon was in High Dutche and
no coynes cast about thereat. V. 7, p. 23.




INDEX[20]

  [20] _Bohemia in British State Papers and Manuscripts_ not indexed.

  Absolon, K., 187

  Alcock, Deborah, 78

  Allen, Fred. H., 168

  Anchoran, John, 29

  Anketell, John, 121

  Ansley, C. F., 68

  Arbes, Jakub, 80

  Augusta, John, 41, 66


  Bailey, W. F., 162

  Bain, Robert Nisbet, 38, 140

  Balch, Emily Green, 22, 55, 56, 64, 163, 179, 180

  Baker’s Biog. Dict. of Musicians, 67, 70, 151

  Baker, James, 71, 78, 106, 108, 122, 147, 148, 168, 171, 177, 180,
    185, 186, 187, 191, 192

  Banks, J. S., 122

  Barlow, William, 90, 93

  Bardeen, C. W., 47, 138

  Barry, Canon William, 168

  Baudiš, Josef, 83

  Bedford, H., 177

  Behringer, C. F., 122

  Bendl, Karel, 151

  Beneš-Třebízský, Václav, 81

  Beneš, Edouard, 162, 168

  Beneš, Vojta, 98, 162

  Benger, Elizabeth Ogilvie, 97

  Benham, David, 108, 129

  Berkeley, George Monck, 97

  Bertram, Paul, 78

  Biog. Dict. of Literature, 66, 140

  Bird, A. F. R., 187

  Bird, Remsen du Bois, 124

  Birnbaum, Martin, 58

  Black, John S., 111

  Blaikie, W. G., 122

  Blazé, de Bury, 97

  Blind, K., 144

  Blodgett, J. H., 137

  Bolton, Henry C., 98

  Bonnechose, F. P. E. B. de, 38, 39, 108, 126

  Bonsal, Stephen, 169

  Born, Baron Inigo, 147

  Bost, Ami, 109

  Botta, Anne C. L., 141

  Bowring, Sir John, 48, 141, 143

  Boyd, Neva L., 154

  Breuer, Libbie A., 81, 82, 145

  Brinton, Christian, 62, 192

  Bristol, Frank M., 128

  Brookbank, J., 130

  Brook, A. Ten, 36, 100

  Brooks, Sydney, 169

  Brown, Charles L., 162

  Brown, D., 122

  Brožík, Václav, 20, 58, 66

  Bruno, Guido, 82, 169

  Budovec, Václav of Budova, 66

  Burchenal, Elizabeth, 151

  Burton, John Hill, 30

  Busse, F., 137

  Butler, Nicholas M., 47, 128, 138

  Buxton, N., 169


  Calkins, N. A., 137

  Cambridge Modern History, 14, 38, 100, 104, 105, 140

  Čapek, Thomas, 42, 52, 53, 81, 82, 98, 144, 158, 163, 180, 181

  Carleton, Sir Dudley, 98

  Carlyle, Thomas, 83

  Carter, John J., 112

  Čech, Svatopluk, 66, 81, 140, 144

  Čermák, B., 144

  Chapman, Benj., 99

  Chapman, Henry G., 154

  Chase, Edith B., 109

  Chéradame, André, 15, 163, 169

  Chesterton, G. K., 166

  Císař, F., 122

  Clark, Francis E., 188

  Cleef, E. van, 149

  Cobbe, Francis P., 180

  Cole, G. A. J., 188

  Collier, Jeremy, 44, 131

  Colquhoun, Archibald P., 17, 99

  Colquhoun, Ethel, 99

  Compayré, Gabriel, 128

  Connolly, Louise, 61

  Cope, G., 106

  Cox, William, 99

  Cramer, M. J., 123

  Cranz, David, 109

  Crawford, F. Marion, 78

  Crawford, W. H., 123

  Creighton, M., 109

  Cruchley, 159

  Curtin, D. T., 163

  Curtin, Jeremiah, 83


  Dallas, R. C., 148

  Damberger, Christian F., 56, 188

  Davis, Catherine B., 181

  Davis, J. W., 177

  Denis, Ernest, 15

  Destinn, Emmy, 51, 66, 154, 156

  Dickinson, Clarence, 151

  Dickinson, Edward, 151

  Dickinson, Helen A., 151

  Dignowity, Anthony M., 66

  Dillon, Edward, 71

  Dobrovský, Josef, 66

  Dodsley’s Annual Register, 97, 98

  Dominian, Leon, 188

  Dorrian, Cecil I., 170

  Doughty, H. M., 188

  Dulken, H. W., 142

  Durie, John, 132

  Dušek, V., 123, 170

  Dussek (Dusík), J. L., 51, 67, 151, 152, 156

  Dvořák, Antonín, 23, 50, 67, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155

  Dvořák, V. J., 155

  Dyer, W. A., 71


  Earbery, Matthias, 120

  Eaton, John, 137

  Eden, Lizzie Selina, 99

  Edwards, Charles E., 123

  Eisenmann, Louis, 38, 100

  Eliášova, B. M., 72

  Elson, Arthur, 152

  Erben, Karel J., 28, 84, 126, 152

  Evans, John, 97

  Evans, M. J., 114


  Fairfield, A. R., 144

  Farnham, Amos W., 144, 192

  Feistmantel, O., 149

  Fejfar, F., 72

  Felts, P., 123

  Ferber, John James, 147

  Fibich, Zděnek, 23, 67, 151, 153

  Field, E. M., 128

  Figulus, Peter, 35, 121

  Finck, Henry T., 152

  Firkins, Ina Ten Eyck, 64

  Firth, Charles H., 34

  Fisher, George P., 109

  Fisher, L. J., 98

  Fisher, Philip M., 137

  Fitz-Simon, Henry, 100

  Forman, Josef, 170

  Fox, John, 109, 110

  Francl, F., 26, 72

  Fraser, W., 190

  Fred, W., 61

  Freeman, Edward A., 102

  Frewer, Ellen, 57

  Fuller, E., 76


  Gardiner, Samuel R., 100

  Gataker, Thomas, 110

  Gayda, Virginio, 164

  Giddins, George H., 123

  Gillett, Ezra Hall, 39, 110, 123, 125

  Gilpin, William, 110

  Gindely, Anton, 36, 100

  Gintl, Franz R. von, 85

  Glasser, M., 177

  Gleig, Georg R., 56, 188

  Glenn, Thomas A., 100

  Glünecke, G. J. R., 159

  Good, James I., 123

  Gooch, G. P., 170

  Gradin, Arvid, 110

  Grande, Julian, 170

  Graves, Frank P., 128

  Green, Mary A. E., 101

  Gregor, Frances, 23, 36, 37, 67, 68, 69, 70, 79, 82, 101, 138, 144

  Grégr, Edward, 67

  Gribble, Francis H., 170

  Grove’s Dict. of Music, 153

  Gurowski, A. de, 145


  Haberlandt, M., 60

  Hadden, J. Cuthbert, 153

  Hadow, W. H., 153

  Hálek, Vítězslav, 140, 145

  Hallivell, George W., 123

  Hamilton, John T., 111

  Hamlin, C., 170

  Hanka, Wenceslaus, 144

  Hanus, Paul H., 47, 128, 138

  Hard, William, 171

  Hark, J. M., 124, 128

  Harrison, John, 34, 88, 92

  Hartlib, Samuel, 130, 131, 132, 136

  Harvitt, Helen J., 154

  Hasse, A. C., 111

  Haven, Gilbert, 176

  Havlasa, Jan, 144, 146

  Havlíček, Karel, 67, 140, 141, 174

  Hawes, J. B., 149

  Hay, Marie, 78

  Hayes, Carleton J. H., 101

  Hazen, Charles D., 101

  Headlam, J. W., 164

  Hedley, P. M. F., 155

  Heilprin, A., 171

  Heilprin, M., 171

  Hejda, F. K., 156

  Hensel, Octavia, 156

  Herites, František, 81

  Herrick, S. E., 111

  Herrman, Augustine, 53, 67, 100, 101, 106, 160, 161

  Hill, Birbeck, 102

  Hilbert, Jaroslav, 76

  Hlaváč, V. J., 156

  Hodges, Le Roy, 179

  Hodgson, Randolph L., 189

  Hodgson, William, 111

  Holárek, Emile, 58, 61

  Holland, J. G., 142

  Hollar, Wenceslaus, 20, 35, 53, 58, 59, 60, 67

  Holme, Charles, 60

  Holmes, John, 111

  Holub, Emil, 57

  Hoole, Charles, 45, 133

  Hopkins, H. P., 156

  Horgan, S. H., 63

  Howell, Charles Fish, 176

  Howitt, Mary, 79

  Hoyt, C. O., 129

  Hrbek, Jeffrey D., 21, 64, 68

  Hrbkova, Šárka B., 69, 76, 77, 112, 171, 179, 181

  Hrdlička, Aleš, 106, 171, 181, 190

  Humpal, Rose M., 81

  Hus, John, 18, 22, 38, 39, 68, 108-127

  Hutton, J. E., 113

  Hye, Isadoor, 106


  Immerman, Karl, 141

  Innes, J. H., 67, 101


  Jacox, F., 106

  James, Henry, 113

  Janauschek, Francesca R. M., 27, 68, 76

  Jansa, V., 177

  Jefferys, T., 159

  Jenkins, Robert C., 101

  Jennewein, F., 61

  Jerome of Prague, 30, 38, 68, 108-127

  Jerrold, Walter C., 171, 186

  Jewett, J. L., 125

  Jičínský, J. Rudiš, 101, 183, 185

  Jirásek, Alois, 27, 68

  Jonáš, Charles, 24, 25, 49, 68, 72, 73, 181

  Judson, Harry P., 98

  Jung, V. A., 73

  Jungmann, Josef, 22, 48, 68, 143


  Kappey, Clara, 153

  Karpeles, Benno, 179

  Kautsky, Karl, 113

  Kay, C. de, 149

  Keatinge, M. W., 43, 134

  Kelly, R. J., 164, 171

  Kerner, R. J., 64, 101

  Keysler, Johann Georg, 56, 189

  Kiddle, Henry, 129

  Kinner, Cyprian, 130

  Kissner, J. G., 181

  Kitts, Eustace J., 113

  Klosé, Edwin G., 138

  Koerner, K. T., 84

  Kohl, Johann Georg, 56, 189

  Kohlbeck, Valentine, 182

  Kollár, John, 16, 22, 68, 140

  Komenský, John Amos, 18, 19, 23, 35, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 69,
    128-139

  Kompiš, Peter S., 69

  Kopta, Flora P., 49, 79, 81, 141, 192

  Korbel, Mario, 61, 62

  Kotouč, Otto, 144, 145, 182

  Koukol, Alois B., 55, 182

  Koula, Jan, 61

  Kovářík, Alois F., 166

  Král, J. J., 22, 52, 80, 81, 106, 112, 138, 145, 149, 155, 156, 157, 158

  Kramář, Karel, 162, 171

  Krasinski, Count V., 113

  Krásnohorská, Eliška, 180

  Kratina, Joseph, 62

  Kratochvil, S., 164

  Kravař (Crawar), Paul, 30

  Krehbiel, H. E., 50, 155, 156

  Krejsa, Antonie, 80

  Kroupa, B., 57

  Krupička, František, 73

  Kryshanovskaya, V. I., 79

  Kubelík, Jan, 51, 69

  Kučera, Magdalena, 182

  Kuhns, L. Oscar, 113

  Kulamer, John, 69

  Kvačala, John, 135

  Kvapil, Jaroslav, 69, 76, 77


  Landa, M. J., 172

  Lang, Andrew, 30

  Lang, Ossian H., 135

  Langridge, Henry S., 85

  La Trobe, Benjamin, 109

  Latrobe, Bishop J., 113

  Latrobe, C. I., 113

  Laurie, S. S., 47, 135, 138

  Lavington, G., 116

  Law, Mary E., 138

  Lederer, John, 57

  Leger, Louis, 15, 68, 102

  Lehner, Ferdinand, 60

  Lenfant, Jacques, 113

  Leslie, Emma, 79

  Lessing, Karl F., 60

  Levetus, A. S., 60, 62

  Levine, Isaac Don, 172

  Lingelbach, William E., 102

  Lippert, Emanuel, 138

  Lodge, Henry Cabot, 102

  Lomas, S. C, 101

  Long, R. C, 172

  Longfellow, Henry W., 16, 141, 142

  Losa, Václav, 123

  Loserth, Johann, 38, 114, 122

  Lowell, A. L., 164

  Lublin, C. Owen, 62

  Lucas, Annie, 79

  Lützow, Count Francis, 22, 23, 37, 38, 39, 44, 46, 50, 55, 69, 85, 102,
    112, 114, 124, 134, 142, 145, 172, 176


  Máchal, Jan, 83

  Machar, J. S., 49, 142, 145

  McCabe, Lida Rose, 62

  McClure, Archibald, 179

  M’Cormick, W. B., 61

  McCorry, John S., 114

  Macdonald, James, 189, 193

  MacKay, F. E., 76

  Mackenzie, A. C., 156

  Mackenzie, Campbell, 108, 109

  McLaughlin, Allan, 182

  Mallery, Charles Payson, 102

  Malin, William Gunn, 22, 65, 114

  Mamatey, Albert, 164

  Mangan, J. C., 141

  Mangasarian, M. M., 115

  Marchant, Francis P., 145, 164

  Masaryk, Alice G., 182

  Masaryk, Thomas G., 52, 54, 69, 162, 164, 165, 167, 169, 170, 172, 182

  Mashek, Nan, 183

  Mason, Daniel G., 152, 153, 155

  Mathews, W. B. S., 155

  Maurice, Charles E., 23, 37, 68, 69, 102

  Maxwell, W. H., 135

  Mears, John W., 115

  Měkota, Beatrice M., 77, 82

  Melichar, A. G., 158

  Melitz, Leo, 154

  Mendelsohn, J., 156

  Menzies, Robert, 120

  Merrylees, John, 147

  Meynier, H., 189

  Michiels, Alfred, 103

  Mika, G. H., 172

  Miller, H. A., 112, 163, 172

  Miller, Kenneth D., 183

  Milles, Jeremiah, 149

  Miškovský, Louis F., 125

  Mitchell, John, 103

  Moleville, M. Bertrand de, 50, 148

  Monroe, Paul, 135, 139

  Monroe (Munro), Robert, 95

  Monroe, Will S., 16, 19, 23, 37, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 103, 129, 135,
    139, 163

  Montgomery, James, 137

  Morfill, R. W., 49, 73, 79, 142, 144

  Morgan, J., 152

  Moryson, Fynes, 189

  Mourek, Jane, 27, 60, 80

  Mourek, V. E., 27, 73, 80

  Mrazek, Joseph, 62

  Mucha, Alfons M., 21, 60, 62, 69

  Mulliken, E. G., 113

  Mulliken, J. L., 113

  Munroe, James P., 136

  Mylechreest, Winifred B., 79


  Naaké, John T., 83

  Nádherný, E. V., 181

  Namier, Lewis B., 165

  Náprstek, Vojta, 61, 69

  Narrative History of Music, 153

  Nedobyty, Anna, 193

  Neisser, George, 125

  Němcová, Božena, 22, 27, 36, 69, 79, 81, 140

  Neruda, Jan, 22, 69, 82, 140, 145

  Newbigin, M. I., 149

  Newman, Francis W., 103

  Niederle, Lubor, 190

  Nigrin, J. V., 53, 73, 141, 146

  Nosek, V., 172


  Ogden, John C., 117

  Oldham, Sam. S., 117

  Ondříček, F., 70

  Ordéga, L., 173

  Ordway, Edith B., 154


  Paalzow, Henriette von, 79

  Pacák, Louis, 73

  Painter, F. V. N., 136

  Palacký, Francis, 39, 49, 70, 106, 107, 140, 164

  Palda, L. J., 173

  Panther (pseud), 173

  Parker, Samuel C., 136

  Pastor, Josef, 158

  Pastor, Ludwig, 117

  Patera, A., 135

  Paterson, Maurice, 136

  Patin, Charles, 190

  Payne, Joseph, 136

  Payne, Peter, 38, 108, 192

  Payne, W. H., 128, 136

  Peabody, Elizabeth P., 103

  Pennington, Arthur R., 117

  Percival, James G., 141

  Pergler, Charles, 55, 165, 166, 173

  Pescheck, C. A., 118

  Philip, Will., 88

  Piper, C. R., 125

  Pisek, Vincent, 153

  Pite, Beresford, 177

  Polasek, Albin, 62

  Pope, R. Martin, 112

  Powell, H. J., 71

  Poyntz, Sydnam, 103

  Pratt, Waldo S., 153

  Price, Charles M., 60

  Prince, J. D., 173

  Prinsep, V. C., 63

  Prochazka, J., 166

  Prusík, Bořivoj, 150

  Prynne, William, 118

  Putnam, Samuel P., 104


  Quick, R. H., 136, 139


  Rae, W. Fraser, 193

  Ralston, W. R. S., 178

  Ramée, Louise de la, 14, 79

  Rashdall, Hastings S., 118

  Rau, Albert G., 125

  Raumer, Karl von, 139

  Raven, J. H., 139

  Recht, Charles, 70, 76, 77, 167

  Reich, Emil, 104

  Reincke, Abraham, 118

  Renselaer, M. G. van, 178

  Richards, Agnes G., 62

  Rieger, F. L., 70

  Riis, Jacob, 179

  Risler, Jeremias, 118

  Robbins, Jane E., 183

  Robinson, Edward, 142

  Robinson, T. A. L. von J. (Talvj), 48, 49, 142, 145, 146

  Rogers, Henry, 119, 125

  Rokycana, Jan, 70

  Rolt, Richard, 119

  Roof, Katherine M., 156

  Roosevelt, Theodore, 173

  Rosenthal, Herman, 21, 65

  Rosický, Marie Bayer, 148

  Rosický, Rose, 148

  Ross, E. A., 183

  Rubicon (pseud), 173

  Runciman, John F., 153

  Rundle, Charles E., 119

  Ruzicka, Rudolph, 61, 63


  Sabina, Karel, 154

  Sadeler, George E., 159

  Šafařík, Paul J., 49, 70, 107, 140

  Salinger, Richard, 154

  Salvo, Marquis Carlo de, 190

  Sand, George, 27, 80

  Šašek, Václav of Bírkov, 29, 104, 106

  Sauzay, A., 71

  Schaff, David S., 38, 111, 119, 125

  Schanzer, Hedwig, 63

  Schauffler, H. A., 183

  Schauffler, R. H., 173

  Schem, A. J., 129

  Schierbrand, Wolf von, 167

  Schindler, Kurt, 154

  Schmitt, Bernadote E., 173

  Schoberl, Frederick, 148

  Schwartz, H., 71

  Schwarze, W. N., 39, 119

  Schweinitz, Edmund de, 38, 39, 66, 68, 70, 119, 124

  Scott, J. L., 136

  Sebastian, Father, 124

  Sellers, Edith, 173

  Selver, P., 23, 49, 142

  Seton-Watson, R. W., 16, 17, 52, 112, 164, 167, 173

  Shaw, Francis G., 80

  Shearer, James W., 73

  Sherwood, J. M., 125

  Sidney, Sir Philip, 104

  Šíma, Joseph, 61

  Šimek, Bohumil, 163

  Singleton, Esther, 154

  Sládek, Josef V., 70, 74, 146

  Sloss, Robert, 174

  Small, J., 119

  Smetana, Bedřich, 23, 50, 51, 70, 151, 153, 154, 157

  Smetanka, J. F., 52, 158, 167, 174

  Šmilovský, Alois V., 27, 80, 140

  Smith, Charlotte F., 104

  Smith, J. Milton, 120

  Smith, Preserved, 125

  Smyth, J. J., 126

  Snow, Francis H., 77

  Sonnenschein, W. S., 142

  Soskice, Juliet M., 79

  Soukup, Anthony M., 74

  Špaček, Anna, 154

  Spalding, M. J., 126

  Stanton, Theodore, 180

  Steed, H. Wickham, 16, 52, 104, 162, 167, 174

  Steiner, Edward A., 180, 183

  Stevenson, I. P., 174

  Stevenson, W. F., 126

  Stiles, William H., 104

  Stoddard, J. L., 190

  Straka, Adolf W., 24, 74

  Street, G. S., 193

  Strickland, Agnes, 29, 105

  Šubert, František A., 77

  Sum, A., 21, 65

  Švarc, Václav, 183

  Světlá, Karolina, 27, 70, 80

  Svobodová, Růžena, 82

  Swehla, Francis J., 183

  Sweny, H. W., 178

  Swoboda, Wenceslaus A., 144

  Sýkora, A. J., 187

  Symons, Arthur, 55, 177, 178


  Taillandier, R. G., 15

  Talvj (Robinson)

  Taylor, Bayard, 15, 190

  Taylor, John, 32, 93

  Thurloe, John, 34

  Thurston, Herbert, 126

  Tille, Václav, 146

  Tomek, V. V., 39

  Torrey, H. W., 126

  Toynbee, Arnold J., 167, 174

  Trench, Richard C., 120

  Troutbeck, Rev., 152

  Turner, R. W., 183

  Twain, Mark, 174

  Tymarchus, Joshua, 46, 133

  Tyrš, Miroslav, 56, 70, 185

  Tyrš, Renata, 63


  Ullman, C., 120

  Updike, D. B., 63

  Upham, T. C., 134


  Váňa, Jan, 74

  Van Dyke, Paul, 120

  Varillas, Antoine, 120

  Vaughn, Robert, 34, 136

  Vericour, L. R. de, 107

  Vernalecken, Theodore, 84

  Vertue, George, 20, 58, 67

  Vickers, Robert H., 23, 36, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 80, 105, 142, 171

  Vizetelly, E. A., 191

  Vlach, J. J., 183

  Vojan, J. E. S., 61, 63, 67, 69, 98, 126, 139, 157, 174

  Vondrous, J. C., 61

  Vostrovský, Clara (Winlow), 69, 80, 82, 139

  Vrchlický, Jaroslav, 70, 77, 146, 152

  Vymazal, F., 26, 75


  Walmsley, 159

  Warburton-Egerton, R. E., 142

  Ward, A. W., 38, 105, 146

  Washington, Booker T., 174

  Watson, Foster, 139

  Wertenbaker, T. J., 174

  Wharton, Leonard C., 18, 19, 22, 65

  Whately, Jane E., 120

  White, Walter, 191

  Wickliffe, John, 29, 30, 38, 79, 105, 114, 118, 120, 121, 122

  Wiener, Leo, 49, 142, 163, 175

  Williams, Robert F., 120

  Williams, Samuel G., 137

  Williams, William H., 105

  Wilson, Woodrow, 53

  Winlow, Clara Vostrovský, 69, 80, 82, 139

  Wistein, Rose, 175

  Wittelshöfer, O., 175

  Workman, Herbert B., 111, 121, 124

  World’s Best Essays, 137

  Worthington, John, 120, 137

  Wortley, Sir Francis, 95, 96

  Wratislaw, A. H., 28, 39, 48, 84, 104, 106, 107, 121, 126, 143

  Wratislaw, Baron Mitrowitz W., 29, 48, 105

  Wyatt, Margaret A., 121

  Wylie, James H., 121


  Yarros, Gregory, 65


  Zajíček, Frank, 154

  Zdrůbek, F. B., 25, 75

  Zelenka, Lerando L., 157

  Zeman, Josephine Humpal, 182, 183, 184

  Žerotín, Lord Karel, 41, 70

  Zeyer, Julius, 27, 82, 140

  Žižka, John, 18, 70, 110, 114, 115, 127

  Zmrhal, Jaroslav J., 26, 75, 98, 141, 148, 158




_Printed in the United States of America_


  [Transcriber's Note: Following are transcriptions of the last two
  illustrations.]


                                THE
                           BOHEMIAN VOICE

       ORGAN OF THE BOHEMIAN-AMERICANS IN THE UNITED STATES.

  Vol. 1.        OMAHA, NEB., SEPTEMBER 1, 1892.        No. 1.


NOTES.

Once Protestant, Bohemia at present is overwhelmingly Catholic. In 1890
the Catholics numbered 96.17 per cent, the Protestants 2.22 per cent and
the Jews 1.56 per cent. It must be borne in mind, however, that prior to
1781, in which year the “Patent of Toleration” was issued, no other church
was tolerated outside the Catholic.

                               *   *
                                 *

Bohemia may be said to be a country of farmers, judging from the number
of persons engaged in agricultural pursuits. Out of every one thousand
people 408.7 per cent are engaged in the cultivation of soil and forestry;
352.6 per cent find employment in manufacturing and mining, 59.5 per cent
in commerce, railroading, etc., and 87.8 per cent earn their living as
laborers.

                               *   *
                                 *

Illiteracy in Bohemia is rapidly disappearing. According to the general
census of 1890 the ratio of adults unable to read and write is 19.69 per
cent, which compares favorably with that of the most advanced of European
nations. Figures compiled in 1881 show the ratio of illiteracy to be in
England, 16 per cent; Scotland, 12; Ireland, 33; France, 22; Germany, 6;
Russia, 89; Austria 51 (education is especially backward in Hungary and
Transylvania); Italy, 59; Spain and Portugal, 66; Switzerland, 12, Belgium
and Holland, 14; Scandinavia, 13.

                               *   *
                                 *

Curiously enough, the natives do not call their country “Bohemia,” but
_Cechy_, nor themselves “Bohemians,” but “Cechs,” pron. “Chekhs” or
“Czechs.” Tradition has it that the leader’s name who conducted the first
Slav tribe to Bohemia was Cech, hence the race name. The Latin chroniclers
of the Middle Ages were altogether ignorant of this, and persisted in
calling the people who bore it Bohemians, and thus the Slavs of Bohemia
inherited the name of the Boii (Germanic race) whom they had displaced.

                               *   *
                                 *

Superintendent of the Census Bureau, Mr. Porter, would hardly sanction the
method adopted by the Austrian government in determining the nationality
of a people. In Bohemia the _language_ spoken is the test. Americans or
Irishmen would, therefore, in Austria, be classed as “English,” because
they speak that language. This ingenious method is highly “useful,”
especially in the present conflict of races, for it helps to bolster up
the minority in the land, deceiving many as to the actual strength of the
Chekhs, thousands of whom use the German language in business and social
relations. Accepting the language as a test, 62.79 per cent were found
in 1890 in Bohemia to “use” the Bohemian and 37.19 per cent the German
tongue.

Austria is a perfect mosaic of races. This diversity is best exemplified
in the complexion of the schools, where all the dominant languages of the
monarchy clamor for recognition. There are universities at Vienna, Prague,
Gratz, Innsbruck, Cernovice, Cracow, Lwow, Buda-Pesth, Kolosvar and
Zagreb. The universities in Vienna, Gratz, Innsbruck and Cernovice teach
in German; the Prague in Chekh; that of Lwow in Polish and Ruthenian; that
of Cracow in Polish; those of Buda-Pesth and Kolosvar in Magyar; that of
Zagreb in Croatian.

                               *   *
                                 *

An Englishman traveling through Bohemia thus describes the people in the
_Illustrated News_: “As for the people there was not a sign of the dreamy
sadness and strange mysticism of the Slav that one is forever reading
about. They worked with a dogged energy and commonplace industry that
would not have been out of the way in Zola’s peasants. In no other country
is it so impossible to remain unconscious of the surplus population
question and the hopelessness of the peasant’s fate. In Germany, or during
our rides in France, in Italy, in England we sometimes had the road to
ourselves; in Bohemia, never. There was always someone just behind us or
in front of us.” This latter statement about the density of population
will be understood when we remember that but 4½ per cent. of all the land
in Bohemia is not under cultivation.

                               *   *
                                 *

Like Ireland Bohemia is governed by a lieutenant governor appointed by
the sovereign. The highest legislative power in the land is the diet
convoking in Prague and composed of 242 members elected by the people.
One archbishop, three bishops and two university rectors, however, hold
their seats by virtue of office. As may be imagined the power the diet
exercises is very limited, the deliberations depending on the pleasure
or displeasure of the emperor, who selects the presiding officer. The
latter is styled as the “marshal,” or “high marshal.” The diet has the
prerogative of electing a standing committee of eight members known as
the “land committee” (zemsky vybor) and over this committee again the
marshal presides. For political and administrative purposes the country
is divided into circles, the circles are sub-divided into captaincies.
The two crownlands, Moravia and Silesia, have each 100 and 31 deputies in
their home diets, respectively. The government officials, though great
reforms have taken place of late, are far from popular. This is especially
the case with the military captains, for whom the people conceive as much
liking as the Italians had for Radetzky and Pachta. Insufferably stiff,
cold, repellent and severe, they were regarded by the people as the source
of all their woes.




                        THE BOHEMIAN REVIEW

OFFICIAL ORGAN OF THE BOHEMIAN (CZECH) NATIONAL ALLIANCE OF AMERICA

 Jaroslav F. Smetanka, Editor, 2324 S. Central Park Ave., Chicago.

  J. J. Fekl, Business Manager, 2816 S. St. Louis Ave., Chicago.

  Vol. I., No. 1.         FEBRUARY, 1917.         10 cents a Copy
                                                  $1.00 per Year

                      _Masaryk and His Work_

A patriot desires but one reward: that he should live to see his labors
bear fruit. On January 12, 1917, thousands of Czechs in the United
States found time in the midst of their joyous celebration of the dawn
of Bohemia’s independence to remember the grand old man of Bohemia,
Thomas Garigue Masaryk. He it was who put the ancient kingdom of Bohemia
once more upon the map of Europe. On the day when the Allies’ answer to
President Wilson was published, he surely was happy, for he had proof that
his titanic labors, his tremendous personal and family sacrifices were not
made in vain. Bohemia’s right to independence was clearly recognized by
the Allies and the liberation of the country from foreign domination was
made one of the conditions of peace.

For centuries no one in Bohemia did more than dream of independence. This
Slav country had been subject to the Hapsburgs for so many generations
and so thoroughly was it repressed that even the boldest spirits among
its leaders regretfully put aside all thoughts of absolute freedom as
visionary and aimed merely at securing for the lands of the Bohemian crown
the widest possible autonomy within the confines of the Austrian Empire.
On several occasions during the long reign of Francis Joseph the Czechs
came near to the realization of these moderate ambitions, but always the
emperor drew back unable to give up his ambition to be the German ruler of
German or Germanized subjects.

Of late years the struggle of the Czechs for a certain amount of liberty
at home and for the right to participate in the government of the Empire
was growing more and more hopeless. The general European situation was
undergoing a change greatly to the disadvantage of Bohemia. The Hapsburg
realm was losing its standing as a great power, due mainly to the constant
internal dissensions and language disputes, while the truly national
states of Europe were growing in population, wealth and military power.
Above all Germany, excelling in industrial and military preparedness,
aggressive and domineering, was looking for new worlds to conquer. America
was out of the question, for the United States was guarding jealously
against the invasion of the two western continents through its Monroe
doctrine. Germany’s African colonies were unsuitable for colonization by
white men and constituted merely a financial burden. Only Asia offered
an undeveloped field--the ramshackle Turkish Empire--and to that land of
promise the road from Germany led through the dual empire and the Balkan
states. Prague was the first stage on the Berlin-Bagdad highway, and
the Czech people were the first obstacle to German expansion. It was a
part of Germany’s plan to reduce Austria to complete subserviency by the
exaltation of its German minority and a more thorough repression of the
Slav and Latin races, with the assistance of the Magyars.

There were not lacking statemen in Bohemia who saw whither things were
tending. Two of them stand out above the other Czech patriots: Dr. Charles
Kramar and Professor Thomas G. Masaryk. Kramar, the leader of the Young
Czech party, for years representative of the middle class of Bohemia,
yielded to no one in his devotion to the race from which he sprang or in
the sincerity of his intentions to serve the Czech people to the best
of his great ability. But being a wealthy manufacturer, a “practical”
man, intent upon gaining results in the Vienna parliament, he failed to
draw the only conclusion necessitated by the changed European situation
which he so well understood. He realized that Germany was “peacefully
penetrating” the Danube monarchy, that the very existence of the Czech
nation was imperiled; on the floor of the parliament and in the Austrian
delegation

  [Transcriber's Note: End of transcriptions.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Bohemian (Cech) Bibliography, by 
Thomas Capek and Anna Vostrovský Capek

